VDAC (voltage-dependent anion channel) is the pore-forming protein located in the outer mitochondrial membrane. In higher eukaryotes, three genes encode VDAC. Nevertheless, the knowledge of VDAC isoforms is mainly restricted to VDAC1, the only isoform that has been characterized from living tissues to date. We have highly enriched the isoform VDAC2 using as starting material bovine spermatozoa. VDAC2 was obtained in the hydroxyapatite/celite pass-through of sperm proteins solubilized with Triton X-100. This fraction showed in SDS/PAGE two major bands and one faint band in the molecular mass range of 30-35 kDa. Two-dimensional electrophoresis resolved these bands in ten spots with various Coomassie Blue staining intensities. Western-blot analysis with antibodies monospecific for each isoform and MS peptide sequencing showed that the main protein resolved in electrophoresis was VDAC2 with minor contaminations of the other isoforms. Proteomic analysis of the higher molecular mass VDAC2 protein allowed the coverage of the whole protein with the exception of the tripeptide A24AR26. In the same material, the presence of two possible amino acid substitutions (T88 to L88 and A97 to Q97) was revealed. Reconstitution of VDAC2 pores in planar lipid bilayers showed typical features of mitochondrial porins. Stepwise increases in membrane conductance were observed with a predominant conductance of approx. 3.5 nS (nanoSiemens) in 1 M KCl. Very often, small short-lived fluctuations were observed with single-channel conductance of approx. 1.5 nS. Bovine spermatozoa VDAC2 was anion selective and showed voltage dependence. The present study is the first work to report the purification and characterization of VDAC2 from a mammalian tissue.
The midgut is the digestive apparatus of the silkworm and its proteome was studied by using nano-LC (liquid chromatography) electrospray ionization MS/MS (tandem MS). MS data were analysed by using X!Tandem searching software using different parameters and validated by using the Poisson model. A total of 90 proteins were identified and 79 proteins were described for the first time. Among the new proteins, (i) 22 proteins were closely related to the digestive function of the midgut, including 11 proteins of digestive enzymes secreted by the epithelium, eight proteins of intestine wall muscle and mechanical digestion and three proteins of peritrophic membrane that could prevent the epithelium from being mechanically rubbed; (ii) 44 proteins were involved in metabolism of substance and energy; and (iii) 11 proteins were associated with signal transduction, substance transport and cell skeleton.
Mitochondrial AOX (alternative oxidase) is the terminal oxidase of the CN (cyanide)-resistant alternative respiratory pathway in plants. To investigate the role of the tobacco AOX gene (NtAOX1a) (where Nt is Nicotiana tabacum) under deleterious conditions which could induce ROS (reactive oxygen species) accumulation, we generated and characterized a number of independent transgenic tobacco (N. tabacum) lines with altered NtAOX1a gene expression and AP (alternative pathway) capacity. AOX efficiently inhibited the production of low-temperature-induced H2O2 and might be a major enzyme for scavenging H2O2 at low temperature. Furthermore, NtAOX1a may act as a regulator of KCN-induced resistance to TMV (tobacco mosaic virus) through the regulation of H2O2. Notably, a moderate accumulation of H2O2 under the control of NtAOX1a was crucial in viral resistance. Analysis of seed germination indicated an important role for NtAOX1a in germination under H2O2-induced oxidative stress when the CP (cytochrome pathway) was inhibited. These results demonstrate that NtAOX1a is necessary for plants to survive low temperature, pathogen attack and oxidative stress by scavenging ROS under these adverse conditions when the CP is restricted.
Traditionally, animal models of schizophrenia were predominantly pharmacological constructs focused on phenomena linked to dopamine and glutamate neurotransmitter systems, and were created by direct perturbations of these systems. A number of developmental models were subsequently generated that allowed testing of hypotheses about the origin of the disease, mimicked a wider array of clinical and neurobiological features of schizophrenia, and opened new avenues for developing novel treatment strategies. The most thoroughly characterized (approximately 100 primary research articles) is the neonatal ventral hippocampal lesion (NVHL) model, which is the subject of this review. We highlight its advantages and limitations, and how it may offer clues about the extent to which positive, negative, cognitive, and other aspects of schizophrenia, including addiction vulnerability, represent inter-related pathophysiological mechanisms.
Impairments in different forms of behavioral flexibility, such as set-shifting and reversal learning, are some of the most reliable cognitive deficits associated with schizophrenia, and have been attributed to a disruption in frontal lobe functioning. However, recent animal studies have highlighted the distinct functional roles that different subcortical systems interconnected with the prefrontal cortex (PFC) play in different forms of behavioral flexibility. This suggests that dysfunction in these circuits also contribute to the cognitive impairments in these processes observed in schizophrenia. The present review summarizes findings from studies that utilize or rodent studies rodents to elucidate the dissociable contributions that prefrontal cortical, striatal, thalamic and dopaminergic systems make to different component processes of behavioral flexibility, with an emphasis on set-shifting functions mediated by the medial PFC. We also review recent work investigating how different manipulations thought to model certain aspects of schizophrenia affect set-shifting and reversal learning. Lastly, we report novel data describing the effects of subchronic ketamine exposure on these forms of flexibility. Ketamine treatment reduced perseverative tendencies during set-shifting, but impaired reversal learning, suggesting a complex disruption of neural circuits related to the nucleus accumbens shell and orbitofrontal cortex. Viewed collectively, these findings further our understanding of how certain neural abnormalities observed in the schizophrenic brain may relate to impairments in behavioral flexibility. This information may facilitate the development of animal models that resemble the complex disruptions in neural circuitry observed in schizophrenia, which would aid in the discovery of novel targeted pharmacotheraputic approaches to ameliorate cognitive dysfunction linked to these circuits.
Prepulse inhibition (PPI) of the acoustic startle reflex has been extensively employed as a test of sensorimotor gating or early attentional control in neuropsychiatric research, because a number of psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia, exhibit PPI deficiencies. In both human and animal studies, PPI is commonly demonstrated by an attenuation of the acoustic startle reflex when the startle-inducing pulse stimulus is shortly preceded by a weak non-startling prepulse stimulus. This weakening of the startle reaction is attributed to, and therefore also provides an indirect measure of, the inhibition triggered by the perception of the prepulse stimulus. The relative ease in measuring the overt pulse-elicited startle reaction, in comparison with the relatively weak prepulse-elicited reaction (PPER) has led to a near complete neglect of the latter in recent literature. However, the assumption that the prepulse used in PPI is non-startling, does not imply that it is associated with no measurable responses. In fact the feasibility and reliability of obtaining such measures has been confirmed in both rodents and humans, and here we review the key findings derived from the direct evaluation of prepulse-elicited reaction in PPI, including under conditions that lead to PPI deficits. The theoretical implications and potential interpretative values of PPER are discussed. It is concluded that PPER should no longer be ignored; its emphasis may shed light on the kind of inhibition or gating dysfunction relevant to PPI disruption seen in pathological conditions including schizophrenia.
There is increasing evidence of immune involvement in both schizophrenia and autism. Of particular interest are striking abnormalities in the expression of immune-related molecules such as cytokines in the brain and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). It is proposed that this represents a permanent state of brain immune dysregulation, which begins during early development. One possibility is that maternal infection, a known risk factor for schizophrenia and autism, sets this immune activation in motion. Several animal models are being used to investigate this hypothesis. There is also recent evidence that, among schizophrenic subjects, those associated with maternal infection display a distinctive pathology, which suggests that diverse causes for this disorder may explain some of its heterogeneity. The human and animal results related to immune involvement suggest novel therapeutic avenues based on immune interventions.
Maternal infection during pregnancy is a notable risk factor for the offspring to develop severe neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia. One prevalent hypothesis suggests that infection-induced disruption of early prenatal brain development predisposes the organism for long-lasting structural and functional brain abnormalities, leading to the emergence of psychopathological behaviour in adulthood. The feasibility of this causal link has received considerable support from several experimental models established in both rats and mice. In this review, we provide an integrative summary of the long-term neuropathological consequences of prenatal exposure to infection and/or inflammation as identified in various experimental models of prenatal immune challenge. In addition, we highlight how abnormalities in distinct brain areas and neurotransmitter systems following prenatal immune activation may provide a neural basis for the emergence of specific forms of psychosis-related behaviour. Specifically, we suggest that prenatal infection-induced imbalances in the mesolimibic and mesocortical dopamine pathways may constitute critical neural mechanisms for disturbances in sensorimotor gating, abnormalities in selective associative learning and hypersensitivity to psychostimulant drugs. On the other hand, the emergence of working memory deficiency following prenatal immune challenge may be crucially linked to the concomitant disruption of GABAergic and glutamatergic functions in prefrontal cortical and hippocampal structures. Notably, many of the identified neuronal abnormalities are directly implicated in the neuropathology of schizophrenia. The findings from prenatal infection models of schizophrenia thus provide considerable experimental evidence for the assumption that prenatal exposure to infection and/or inflammation is a relevant environmental link to specific neuronal abnormalities underlying psychosis-related behaviour in humans.
Symptoms of schizophrenia, commonly divided into positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive impairments, exhibit different sensitivity to pharmacological treatments. As such, they are typically modeled in animals by behavioral effects of drugs that evoke these symptoms in humans, such as amphetamine or phencyclidine (PCP). Despite the fact that muscarinic antagonists also evoke a schizophrenia-like syndrome ("antimuscarinic syndrome") and findings of cholinergic-related alterations in brains of schizophrenia patients, modeling schizophrenia using muscarinic manipulations has been infrequently considered, and the effects of muscarinic blockade on behavioral tasks relevant to schizophrenia have not been adequately characterized. The present review surveys recent attempts to model schizophrenia-related symptoms using manipulations causing cholinergic dysfunction, particularly muscarinic blockade, in well validated behavioral models of schizophrenia, such as prepulse inhibition and latent inhibition.
The pathogenesis of schizophrenia and related mental illnesses likely involves multiple interactions between susceptibility genes of small effects and environmental factors. Gene-environment interactions occur across different stages of neurodevelopment to produce heterogeneous clinical and pathological manifestations of the disease. The main obstacle for mechanistic studies of gene-environment interplay has been the paucity of appropriate experimental systems for elucidating the molecular pathways that mediate gene-environment interactions relevant to schizophrenia. Recent advances in psychiatric genetics and a plethora of experimental data from animal studies allow us to suggest a new approach to gene-environment interactions in schizophrenia. We propose that animal models based on identified genetic mutations and measurable environment factors will help advance studies of the molecular mechanisms of gene-environment interplay.
Mutant mouse models related to schizophrenia have been based primarily on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, the known effects of antipsychotic drugs, and candidate genes for schizophrenia. Sensorimotor gating deficits in schizophrenia patients, as indexed by measures of prepulse inhibition of startle (PPI), have been well characterized and suggested to meet the criteria as a useful endophenotype in human genetic studies. PPI refers to the ability of a non-startling "prepulse" to inhibit responding to the subsequent startling stimulus or "pulse." Because of the cross-species nature of PPI, it has been used primarily in pharmacological animal models to screen putative antipsychotic medications. As techniques in molecular genetics have progressed over the past 15 years, PPI has emerged as a phenotype used in assessing genetic mouse models of relevance to schizophrenia. In this review, we provide a selected overview of the use of PPI in mouse models of schizophrenia and discuss the contribution and usefulness of PPI as a phenotype in the context of genetic mouse models. To that end, we discuss mutant mice generated to address hypotheses regarding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and candidate genes (i.e., hypothesis driven). We also briefly discuss the usefulness of PPI in phenotype-driven approaches in which a PPI phenotype could lead to "bottom up" approaches of identifying novel genes of relevance to PPI (i.e., hypothesis generating).
Latent inhibition (LI) is a cross species selective attention phenomenon reflecting a modulating effect of past experience with inconsequential stimuli on current task performance involving these stimuli. Specifically, it refers to the observation that organisms that receive nonreinforced preexposure to the to-be conditioned stimulus are less efficient in generating a conditioned response to that stimulus when it is subsequently paired with reinforcement. Because dysfunction of attentional selectivity is a fundamental deficit associated with schizophrenia, disrupted LI is long considered to model attentional abnormalities in schizophrenia. Here we show that different pharmacological manipulations can produce two poles of abnormality in LI: disrupted LI under conditions which yield LI in non-treated rats, and abnormally persistent LI under conditions which disrupt LI in non-treated rats. We describe several distinct LI models based upon the manipulation used to alter the expression of LI, the direction of LI abnormality, and responsiveness to typical and atypical antipsychotic drugs (APDs) as well as other schizophrenia-relevant treatments: DA agonist; DA antagonist; NMDA antagonist; and muscarinic antagonist. We tentatively suggest that these models represent four domains of pathology in schizophrenia: DA agonist and muscarinic antagonist-induced disrupted LI represents a domain of positive symptoms that respond to typical and atypical APDs and some cognitive enhancers; NMDA antagonist-induced persistent LI represents a domain of negative/cognitive symptoms that respond to atypical APDs and cognitive enhancers but not typical APDs; antimuscarinic-induced persistent LI represents a domain of cognitive symptoms that are responsive to cognitive enhancers but are resistant to typical and atypical APDs; finally, DA antagonist-induced persistent LI represents a domain of negative symptoms that are treatable by atypical APDs but are resistant to cognitive enhancers.
Deficits in N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) function play a critical role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Animal models are needed to investigate possible mechanisms underlying NMDA dysfunction in schizophrenia as well as development of new therapeutic approaches. A major difficulty in developing animal models for schizophrenia is the identification of quantifiable measures that can be tested in a similar fashion in both humans and animals. The majority of animal models utilize analogous measures, wherein species-specific behaviors are used as presumed parallel manifestations of a common underlying construct. In vivo microdialysis and electrophysiology represent two methodologies in which homologous measures can instead be obtained in both animals and humans. In both techniques, well-validated, NMDA-sensitive measures are analyzed in rodents using probes implanted directly into cortex or subcortical structures. We discuss the currently available data from studies that used these methods in non-human primate and rodent glutamate models. In addition, we emphasize the possible relevance of the amphetamine-challenge studies to positive symptoms and of EEG measures to cognitive deficits in schizophrenia.
There is compelling postmortem evidence that GABA cell dysfunction plays a role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia (SZ). Based on a unique distribution of postmortem abnormalities in layer II of the anterior cingulate cortex and sectors CA3/2 of the hippocampus, we postulated that afferent fibers from the basolateral amygdala to these sites may contribute to diminished GABAergic modulation in these disorders. To test this hypothesis, picrotoxin (PICRO), a non-competitive antagonist of the GABA-A receptor, is stereotaxically infused the basolateral complex of the amygdala (BLA) to increase the flow of excitatory activity into stratum oriens (SO) of sectors CA3/2 of the hippocampus. This pharmacological manipulation results in a selective reduction of GABAergic interneurons containing parvalbumin, calbindin and calretinin in CA3/2. Using single cell recordings in a hippocampal slide preparation, these changes in PICRO-treated rats seem to be associated with a reduction in evoked and spontaneous inhibitory post-synaptic potentials (sIPSCs) recorded from pyramidal neurons in sector CA3/2, but not CA1. A lower resting membrane potential and an increased action potential firing rate have been recorded in interneurons in the SO of CA2/3, but not CA1. Additionally, currents associated with hyperpolarization-activated cationic channels (Ih), which help to control neuronal firing rates of GABA cells in the hippocampus, were also increased. Overall, these studies support the view that postmortem studies contribute information for the development of empiric models of SZ, ones that can be used as translational tools for elucidating the functional changes that may be present in GABA cell subtypes their molecular regulatory mechanisms in this disorder.
Animal models are critical for the study of psychiatric disorders since they allow the use of invasive methods that cannot be used for ethical reasons in humans. Currently there are three general models of schizophrenia; (i) those produced with acute pharmacological intervention (i.e. MK-801, ketamine, PCP and amphetamine), (ii) genetic models (i.e. mutant DISC-1, D(2)-R over expression) and (iii) developmental disruption models (i.e. MAM, neonatal ventral hippocampal lesion, isolation rearing, maternal infection). Here we review evidence for the validity of gestational (day 17) MAM administration as a developmental disruption rodent model of schizophrenia. Offspring from MAM-treated dams are reported to display deficits consistent with those observed in schizophrenia patients, including anatomical changes, behavioral deficits and altered neuronal information processing. Thus gestational MAM administration has been demonstrated to induce a pathodevelopmental process leading to neuroanatomical and behavioral phenotypes consistent with that observed in schizophrenia in humans.
The hypothesis of hypo-functionality of NMDA receptors in schizophrenia originates from the observation that administration of the NMDA antagonist phencyclidine (PCP) induces psychotic states that closely resemble schizophrenic symptoms and that persist after drug discontinuation. A large number of animal studies have used PCP and the NMDA antagonist dizocilpine (MK-801) almost interchangeably to model schizophrenia. However, PCP interacts with pharmacological targets other than NMDA receptors that are not affected by MK-801. In addition, although acute administration of either compound produces similar effects in animals, there is little information whether withdrawal from chronic MK-801 causes behavioral deficits that mimic schizophrenia symptoms as in the case of PCP. To clarify this issue, we compared the following behaviors in rats subjected to withdrawal from sub-chronic administration (2 x 7 days) of either PCP (5 mg/kg, i.p.) or MK-801 (0.5 mg/kg, i.p.): (1) working memory in a variable-delayed alternation task in a T-maze, (2) social interaction, and (3) motor activity in response to a (a) novel environment, (b) mild stressor, and (c) d-amphetamine challenge. Withdrawal from sub-chronic PCP caused a delay-dependent impairment of working memory, reduced social interaction and enhanced d-amphetamine-induced motor activity. These results were not replicated in animals sub-chronically treated with MK-801, which displayed only a slight decrease in social interaction. These data suggest that pharmacological antagonism at NMDA receptors is not sufficient to explain the full spectrum of PCP psychotomimetic properties.
According to the sensorimotor theory of lexicosemantic organization, semantic representations are neurally distributed and anatomically linked to category-specific sensory areas. Previous functional neuroimaging studies have demonstrated category specificity in lexicosemantic representations. However, little evidence is available from word generation paradigms, which provide access to semantic representations while minimizing confounds resulting from low-level perceptual features of stimulus presentation. In this study, 13 healthy young adults underwent fMRI scanning while performing a word generation task, generating exemplars to nine different semantic categories. Each semantic category was assigned to one of three superordinate category types, based upon sensorimotor modalities (visual, motor, somatosensory) presumed to predominate in lexical acquisition. For word generation overall, robust activation was seen in left inferior frontal cortex. Analyses by sensorimotor modality categories yielded activations in brain regions related to perceptual and motor processing: Visual categories activated extrastriate cortex, motor categories activated the intraparietal sulcus and posterior middle temporal cortex, and somatosensory categories activated postcentral and inferior parietal regions. Our results are consistent with the sensorimotor theory, according to which lexicosemantic representations are distributed across brain regions participating in sensorimotor processing associated with the experiential components of lexicosemantic acquisition.
There are some past experiences that we would prefer not to remember. Previous research has shown that repeatedly stopping retrieval of an unwanted memory increases the probability of later forgetting of that memory, and engages prefrontal control mechanisms to attenuate activity in the hippocampus. However, the mechanisms of preventing memory retrieval, and how these relate to the later forgetting, are yet to be fully understood. Here we present neural and behavioural evidence that two distinct strategies for retrieval stopping - direct memory suppression and self-distracting thought substitution - contribute to forgetting of unwanted memories in qualitatively different ways. Only direct memory suppression reduced centro-parietal positivity in the event-related potentials (ERP) between 300 and 600 ms post-stimulus, consistent with a reduction in the ERP correlate of recollection. Furthermore, only direct memory suppression produced later inhibitory forgetting that was predicted by an earlier negative ERP effect that may be associated with motor inhibition. In contrast, thought substitution produced later non-inhibitory forgetting and had no effect on the ERP correlate of recollection. Our findings demonstrate the first ERP and behavioural dissociation between inhibitory and non-inhibitory forgetting, and suggest that unwanted memories may be directly suppressed without selective retrieval of alternative memories.
A fundamental, yet rarely tested premise of developmental cognitive neuroscience is that changes in brain activity and improvements in behavioral control across adolescent development are related to brain maturational factors that shape a more efficient, highly-interconnected brain in adulthood. We present the first multimodal neuroimaging study to empirically demonstrate that maturation of executive cognitive ability is directly associated with the relationship of white matter development and age-related changes in neural network functional integration. In this study, we identified specific white matter regions whose maturation across adolescence appears to reduce reliance on local processing in brain regions recruited for conscious, deliberate cognitive control in favor of a more widely distributed profile of functionally-integrated brain activity. Greater white matter coherence with age was associated with both increases and decreases in functional connectivity within task-engaged functional circuits. Importantly, these associations between white matter development and brain system functional integration were related to behavioral performance on tests of response inhibition, demonstrating their importance in the maturation of optimal cognitive control.
Gray matter atrophy observed by brain MRI is an important correlate to clinical disability and disease duration in multiple sclerosis. The objective of this study was to link brain atrophy visualized by neuroimaging to its underlying neuropathology using the MS model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Volumetric changes in brains of EAE mice, as well as matched healthy normal controls, were quantified by collecting post-mortem high-resolution T2-weighted magnetic resonance microscopy and actively stained magnetic resonance histology images. Anatomical delineations demonstrated a significant decrease in the volume of the whole cerebellum, cerebellar cortex, and molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex in EAE as compared to normal controls. The pro-apoptotic marker caspase-3 was detected in Purkinje cells and a significant decrease in Purkinje cell number was found in EAE. Cross modality and temporal correlations revealed a significant association between Purkinje cell loss on neuropathology and atrophy of the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex by neuroimaging. These results demonstrate the power of using combined population atlasing and neuropathology approaches to discern novel insights underlying gray matter atrophy in animal models of neurodegenerative disease.
Sentences with embedding are more complex than sentences without embedding, because they contain more syntactic layers in their phrasal architecture. Until now, neuroimaging studies tested embedded sentences that also included syntactic movement. To explore which cortical areas are specifically involved in the processing of syntactic layers, we used embedded sentences that did not include syntactic movement. We compared sentences in which the verb was complemented with an embedded sentence (CP complement) to sentences with noun phrase (NP) complements. The comparison of sentences with and without embedding revealed activations in the left IFG, bilateral temporo-parietal cortices, bilateral MTG, and precuneus. We further examined the effect of embedding at the lexical level. For this, we tested whether verbs that can select CP complements, namely, whose lexical entry includes a CP option, are more complex than verbs that do not select CP complements, even when both verb types appeared in sentences without embedding. The comparison of verbs that can take CP complements with verbs that can take NP complements, when these verbs appeared with prepositional phrase complements, revealed activations in bilateral anterior MTG and precuneus, showing that embedding also affects processing at the lexical level. The results thus show that sentential embedding, even without syntactic movement, loads onto several cortical resources including the left IFG, indicating that the generation of syntactic layers is cognitively costly, and that embedding affects processing at both the sentence and the lexical levels.
Multi-parametric and quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques have come into the focus of interest, both as a research and diagnostic modality for the evaluation of patients suffering from mild cognitive decline and overt dementia. In this study we address the question, if disease related quantitative magnetization transfer effects (qMT) within the intra- and extracellular matrices of the hippocampus may aid in the differentiation between clinically diagnosed patients with Alzheimer disease (AD), patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and healthy controls. We evaluated 22 patients with AD (n=12) and MCI (n=10) and 22 healthy elderly (n=12) and younger (n=10) controls with multi-parametric MRI. Neuropsychological testing was performed in patients and elderly controls (n=34). In order to quantify the qMT effects, the absorption spectrum was sampled at relevant off-resonance frequencies. The qMT-parameters were calculated according to a two-pool spin-bath model including the T1- and T2 relaxation parameters of the free pool, determined in separate experiments. Histograms (fixed bin-size) of the normalized qMT-parameter values (z-scores) within the anterior and posterior hippocampus (hippocampal head and body) were subjected to a fuzzy-c-means classification algorithm with downstreamed PCA projection. The within-cluster sums of point-to-centroid distances were used to examine the effects of qMT- and diffusion anisotropy parameters on the discrimination of healthy volunteers, patients with Alzheimer and MCIs. The qMT-parameters T2(r) (T2 of the restricted pool) and F (fractional pool size) differentiated between the three groups (control, MCI and AD) in the anterior hippocampus. In our cohort, the MT ratio, as proposed in previous reports, did not differentiate between MCI and AD or healthy controls and MCI, but between healthy controls and AD.
Tensor-based morphometry (TBM) is a powerful method to map the 3D profile of brain degeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We optimized a TBM-based image analysis method to determine what methodological factors, and which image-derived measures, maximize statistical power to track brain change. 3D maps, tracking rates of structural atrophy over time, were created from 1030 longitudinal brain MRI scans (1-year follow-up) of 104 AD patients (age: 75.7+/-7.2 years; MMSE: 23.3+/-1.8, at baseline), 254 amnestic MCI subjects (75.0+/-7.2 years; 27.0+/-1.8), and 157 healthy elderly subjects (75.9+/-5.1 years; 29.1+/-1.0), as part of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). To determine which TBM designs gave greatest statistical power, we compared different linear and nonlinear registration parameters (including different regularization functions), and different numerical summary measures derived from the maps. Detection power was greatly enhanced by summarizing changes in a statistically-defined region-of-interest (ROI) derived from an independent training sample of 22 AD patients. Effect sizes were compared using cumulative distribution function (CDF) plots and false discovery rate methods. In power analyses, the best method required only 48 AD and 88 MCI subjects to give 80% power to detect a 25% reduction in the mean annual change using a two-sided test (at alpha=0.05). This is a drastic sample size reduction relative to using clinical scores as outcome measures (619 AD/6797 MCI for the ADAS-Cog, and 408 AD/796 MCI for the Clinical Dementia Rating sum-of-boxes scores). TBM offers high statistical power to track brain changes in large, multi-site neuroimaging studies and clinical trials of AD.
Photoparoxysmal response (PPR) is an electroencephalographic (EEG) trait characterized by the occurrence of epileptiform discharges in response to visual stimulation. Studying this trait helps to learn about mechanisms of epileptogenicity. While simultaneous recordings of EEG and functional MRI (EEG-fMRI) in patients with spontaneous generalised spike-wave discharges (GSW) have revealed activation of the thalamus and deactivation in frontoparietal areas, EEG-fMRI studies on evoked GSW such as PPR are lacking. In this EEG-fMRI study, 30 subjects with reported generalised PPR underwent intermittent photic stimulation (IPS) in a 3 T MR scanner. PPR was elicited in 6 subjects, four diagnosed with idiopathic generalised epilepsy and two with tension-type headache. Because PPR is preceded by synchronization of cortical gamma oscillations, blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal changes were analysed at the onset of the PPR (standard regressor) and 3 s before the onset of PPR (early regressor) in one model. In all subjects, IPS led to a significant activation of the visual cortex. Based on the early regressor, PPR associated activation was found in the parietal cortex adjacent to the intraparietal sulcus in five and in the premotor cortex in all 6 subjects. The standard regressor revealed deactivation in early activated areas in all subjects and thalamic activation in one subject. In contrast to spontaneous GSW, these results suggest that PPR is a cortical phenomenon with an involvement of the parietal and frontal cortices. Pronounced haemodynamic changes seen with the early regressor could mirror gamma activity that is known to precede PPR.
In everyday life, people select motor responses according to arbitrary rules. For example, our movements while driving a car can be instructed by color cues that we see on traffic lights. These stimuli do not spatially relate to the actions that they specify. Associations between these stimuli and actions are called arbitrary visuomotor conditional associations. Earlier fMRI studies have tried to dissociate the sensory and motor components of these associations by introducing delays between the presentation of arbitrary cues and go-signals that instructed participants to perform actions. This approach, however, also introduces neural processes that are not necessarily related to the normal real-time production of arbitrary visuomotor responses, such as working memory and the suppression of motor responses. We used fMRI adaptation as an alternative approach to dissociate sensory and motor components. We found that visual areas in the occipital-temporal cortex adapted only to the presentation of arbitrary visual cues whereas a number of sensorimotor areas adapted only to the production of response. Visual areas in the occipital-temporal cortex do not have any known connections with parts of the brain that can control hand musculature. Therefore, it is conceivable that the brain areas that we report as having adapted to both stimulus presentation and response production (namely, the dorsal premotor area, the supplementary motor area, the cingulate, the anterior intra-parietal sulcus area, and the thalamus) are involved in the multiple steps between processing visual stimuli and activating the motor commands that these cues specify.
Schizophrenia is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder whose etiology involves a mixture of genetic and environmental factors. By virtue of this complexity, schizophrenia is a field of research in which a number of key technologies converge: in particular, identification of putative susceptibility genes through association studies in clinical populations leads to investigation of the behavioural roles of these genes by targeted manipulation in mice and their phenotypic characterisation ('gene-driven' approach); in a complementary manner, identification of putative pathophysiological processes and therapeutic pathways leads to investigation of behavioural phenotype in mice mutant for genes regulating such processes and pathways ('phenotype-driven' approach). As several susceptibility genes for schizophrenia and numerous genes implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia have now been genetically manipulated in mice, it is timely to consider the roles of these genes in abnormal brain development and the ontogeny of putative schizophrenia-like phenotypes. The aim of this review is to outline existing knowledge from mutant studies concerning the contribution of these genes to the development of a common schizophrenia phenotype vis-à-vis discrete schizophrenia endophenotypes. Emphasis is also placed on the importance of studying gene x environment and gene x gene interactions, as well as addressing methodological issues related to genetic modelling and phenotyping strategies.
Remarkable results obtained while searching for suitable contrasting agents for tomographical imaging are presented. Book lungs, the respiratory organs of scorpions (Scorpiones, Arachnida), served as challenging objects in terms of fragility and preparatory requirements, as well in terms of size differences between the entire organ and its functional subunits (the lamellae). The problem of tissue contrast was investigated using various metals, but most successfully addressed using osmium. Gaseous osmium tetroxide exposure with subsequent ethanol treatment yielded the best results. A constant and thorough staining of the book lungs was achieved, easing book-lung visualization using 3D-reconstructions from microCT scans.
The proventriculus is a specialized part of the foregut in the alimentary canal in some insects, varying greatly in its structure across different insect groups. The ultramorphology of the proventriculus in Mecoptera was investigated in eight species of Panorpidae and one of the Bittacidae using light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The proventriculus consists of the outer circular muscles, the inner longitudinal muscles, an epithelium, and a sclerotized intima with dense acanthae. The proventricular acanthae could be divided into three categories: the anterior acanthae (AA), the main acanthae (MA), and the posterior acanthae (PA). In Panorpidae the AA are rounded in cross section and could be subdivided into two subtypes, the long AA with a polytomy apiculus and the short AA with a V-shaped or spine-like apiculus. The MA, covering the majority of the proventricular inner surface, are dense, uniform, and hollow rectangular structures in cross section with forked apiculi. Each hollow base of the MA was first found to be inserted with a cone-shaped process of the corresponding epithelial cell. The PA are very thin, with a spine-like apiculus. In Bittacidae the proventriculus is specialized by a ring of cuticular thickening within its anterior orifice, and the AA are shaped like a ring of thin spines. Six cardiac valves were observed in Panorpidae and ten in Bittacidae. The functions of the various types of acanthae in digestion and extra-oral digestion and their significance in insect systematics are briefly discussed.
This paper represents the study of the biological effects of static magnetic fields (SMFs) on Escherichia coli (E. coli). The bacterial strain E. coli was exposed to SMFs in order to test its viability (evaluated by the number of colony-forming units (CFU)). In this study, we measured the dependence of CFU on the duration of exposure, on the treatment temperature T and on the value of the magnetic field induction B. The results showed that the number of CFU decreased with longer exposure time and higher treatment temperature (from 25 degrees C to 40 degrees C), whereas multiple extreme values of number of CFU were obtained when the induction B changed. In order to explain the results, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to investigate the morphology of the cells. We found obvious cell surface damage when the cells were exposed to SMFs.
High-resolution electron microscopy was applied to analyze the continuous precipitated particles of the gamma-Mg(17)Al(12) phase with Pitsch-Schrader OR in the heat-treated AZ91 alloy at 473 K for 8 h. The existence of a continuous precipitated particle with the Pitsch-Schrader OR including the selection of the habit plane and the growth direction in Mg-Al system is rationalized by the constrained coincidence site lattice/constrained complete pattern shift lattice (CCSL/CDSCL) model and the O-lattice theory.
We present the detailed imaging of structures and processes of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) using non-linear microscopy. Complementary information about the anatomy of the nematode was collected by implementing a combination of two photon excitation fluorescence (TPEF), second and third harmonic generation (SHG and THG) image contrast modes on the same microscope. Three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions of TPEF, SHG and THG images were also performed. Moreover, THG imaging technique has been tested as a potential, novel, non-destructive diagnostic tool for monitoring cellular processes in vivo, such as neuronal degeneration.
Convergent Beam Electron Diffraction (CBED) experiments and simulations associated with Finite Element calculations were performed in order to measure strain and stress in a complex device such as periodic MOS transistors with a spatial resolution of about 2 nm and a sensitivity that could reach 50 MPa. A lamella of a thickness of about 475 nm was extracted from the wafer with the transistors by Focus Ion Beam (FIB) and was observed in cross-section in a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). When approaching the transistors, the HOLZ lines of the CBED patterns acquired in the silicon substrate, become broader and broader. This HOLZ line broadening, which is due to the stress relaxation in the thin foil, was used to determine quantitatively the strain and stress in the lamella and then in the bulk device. We showed that this procedure could be applied to a complex device. Two parameters, the intrinsic material strains--or equivalently the intrinsic material stresses--in the nickel silicide (NiSi) and nitride (Si(3)N(4)) layers on the top of the transistors gate, were successfully fitted by trial and error, in the procedure.
We investigated the cytological mechanism of parthenogenesis by analyzing the chromosomes in five weevil species. All examined species are polyploids, four of which: Otiorhynchus ovatus, Simo variegates, Cathormiocerus aristatus, and Tropiphorus elevatus possess three haploid sets of chromosomes (3n=33), whereas the fifth, Trachyphloeus parallelus, is tetraploid with 44 chromosomes (4n=44). The plates contained 27-31 chromosomes in triploid species and 38, 39, 41 and even 44 in tetraploid T. parallelus. In all species single clusters of metaphase plates with a haploid number of n=11 were visible. Some oogonial cells showed nuclei configurations resembling the stages of diplotene and diakinesis. The spiralized chromosomes in these nuclei may have been connected by chiasmata resulting in rods figures and ring-shaped bivalents. Occurrence of the remnants of meiosis could suggest some degree of recombination in parthenogenetic lineages of weevils.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a powerful tool in imaging cells and tissues and probing their mechanical properties. Articular chondrocytes, the cells responsible for the production and maintenance of cartilaginous extracellular matrix in the knee joint, change their morphology and dedifferentiate during in vitro expansion culture. It was unclear if the mechanical properties of chondrocytes change accompanying phenotype variation. The elasticity of in vitro serially cultured bovine articular chondrocytes was investigated using AFM. The chondrocytes changed their morphology from round to spindle-like. The freeze-dried P0 chondrocytes showed significantly higher modulus than did the serially passaged (P1-P4) chondrocytes. The change of chondrocyte morphology was accompanied with a decrease of elastic modulus.
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) affects macroalgae in many important ways, including reduced growth rate, reduction of primary productivity and changes in cell biology and ultrastructure. Among red macroalgae, Kappaphycus alvarezii is of economic interest by its production of kappa carrageenan. Only a few reports have examined the changes in macroalgae ultrastructure and cell biology resulting from UVB radiation exposure. Therefore, we examined two strains of K. alvarezii (green and red) exposed to UVB for 3 h per day during 28 days and then processed them for histochemical and electron microscopy analysis. Reaction with Toluidine Blue showed an increase in the thickness of the cell wall and Periodic Acid-Schiff stain showed a decrease in the number of starch grains. UVBR also caused changes in the ultrastructure of cortical and subcortical cells, which included increased thickness of the cell wall and number of free ribosomes and plastoglobuli, reduced intracellular spaces, changes in the cell contour, and destruction of chloroplast internal organization. Based on these lines of evidence, it was evident by the ultrastructural changes observed that UVBR negatively affects intertidal macroalgae and, by extension, their economic viability.
Vardenafil citrate is a potent vasodilator used in the treatment of patients with erectile dysfunction. Its mechanism of action is based on the selective inhibition of phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5), specific to guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP). Recently, chronic treatment with Vardenafil has been successfully used in cases of pulmonary hypertension and, despite being used in high doses for long periods, little is known about its effects on other systems. In the present study, female mice were treated daily with 5 mg/kg Vardenafil for 4 weeks, after which the ovaries were collected for morphological analyses and sera were collected for biochemical assays. This study found that treatment with Vardenafil decreased HDL serum levels and the number of antral follicles as well as induced lesser lipid content in luteal cells, suggesting that high levels of cGMP may affect follicle development.
Atomic force microscopy was used to distinguish changes in morphology of bacteria induced by 50 Hz 10 mT magnetic field exposure. It is known that alternating magnetic field exposure causes decrease of viability of different bacterial strains. Previously we found that the viability of rod-like bacteria exposed to magnetic field decreased twice more in comparison with the spherical ones. Motivated by this fact we carried out this study with bacterial cells of both shapes. We used Escherichia coli (rod-like) and Paracoccus denitrificans (spherical) bacteria. As a result we have not observed any change in bacterial morphology neither of rod-like nor of spherical bacteria after 1 h, 50 Hz and 10 mT magnetic field exposure.
Conventional chromosome staining has suggested that more than 75% of the tomato chromosomes are constituted by heterochromatin. In order to determine whether more deeply stained proximal regions are classic heterochromatin, the distributions of C-bands and chromomycin A(3) (CMA) bands, and the prophase condensation patterns, were analysed in tomato. In this and most other species of the tomato clade, the 5S and 45S rDNA sites were also localised. In tomato, CMA banding was similar to C-banding. After conventional staining, all species displayed large condensed heteropycnotic regions that did not correspond to C-bands or CMA bands. Analyses of the CMA banded karyotypes revealed a low heterochromatin content. Around 12-17% of the chromatin of tomato was CMA(+) and 1/4 to 1/5 of this heterochromatin corresponded to 45S rDNA. In other species, the CMA(+) heterochromatin showed extensive variation (8-35%), but was never near the values found in the literature for tomato. These data suggest the existence of three principal fractions of chromatin in tomato and related species: the late condensed euchromatin corresponding to the terminal regions of the chromosomes, the precocious condensed euchromatin that occupies the major part of the chromosomes and the constitutive heterochromatin that represents those regions revealed by C-bands.
Confocal fluorescence imaging and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) technology have been widely used to study protein-protein interactions in living cells. However, it is very difficult to quantitatively analyze FRET efficiency due to the excitation spectral crosstalk and emission spectral crosstalk between donor and acceptor. In this study, we developed a novel method to quantitatively obtain the FRET efficiency by fitting the emission spectra (FES) of donor-acceptor pair, and this method is free from both excitation and emission spectral crosstalk. We used the FES method to quantitatively monitor the FRET efficiency of SCAT3, a caspase-3 indicator based on FRET, inside living cells stably expressing SCAT3 during STS-induced apoptosis. At 0, 6 and 12 h after STS treatment, the FRET efficiency of SCAT3 obtained by FES are consistent with that by two-photon excitation (TPE) fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) in living cells stably expressing SCAT3. In this study, the FES was also used to analyze the caspase-3 activation in living cells during anti-cancer drug such as taxol, Artesunate (ART) or Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) treatment. Our results showed that ART or DHA induced apoptosis by a caspase-3-dependent manner, while caspase-3 was not involved in taxol-induced cell death.
The organic matrix of alveolar bone is composed fundamentally of type I collagen. Polarized light microscopy provides unique information about the structure, composition and polymerization degree of a variety of organic and inorganic tissues that is not available with other techniques. The aim of this research was to compare two methodologies of polarized light analysis for collagen organization in bone formation during orthodontic tooth movement and determined maturity of collagen over the time. Thirty Wistar rats were euthanized 3, 7 and 14 days after the NiTi unilateral closed-coil spring was stretched between the upper right first molar and the incisors. The control consisted by contra-lateral site. The first molar area was fixed, decalcified and histologically processed using picrosirius pigment. The collagen birefringence of bone turnover was analyzed by color percentage and phase retardation. We observed an increase in collagen fiber organization over time with two methodologies. The Pearson coefficient correlation indicated a strong relationship (0.76) among the two polarized light analyses. In summary, there is collagen maturation over 3, 7 and 14 days. We successfully evaluated the molecular organization, arrangement, degree of polymerization and maturation process of collagen fibers in bone turnover through color percentages and phase retardation.
Scanning electron microscopy is a powerful technique in several fields of science and technology. In particular it is an important complement in the characterization of materials for which X-ray analysis is not possible. Such is the case of thin paint layers on ceramic pots, in which, even for low incident energies, the electron interaction volume can be greater than the paint thickness--in addition to the problem arising from similar compositions. With the aim of complementing other common techniques used in compositional materials characterization, in this work, an image-processing software has been developed, which implements a new methodology for the treatment of backscattered electron (BSE) images in order to bring to evidence small mean atomic number contrasts, usually imperceptible to human eye. The program was used to study black and white pigments of ceramic pieces belonging to the Ambato style of "Aguada" culture (Catamarca province, Argentina, IV-XII centuries AD). Although the BSE images acquired for these samples showed no apparent contrast between sherd and black and white pigments, through image-processing algorithms using different space filters, chemical contrast between regions has been brought to evidence with a minor detail loss. This has been accomplished by applying a smoothing filter, after which the main routine for contrast enhancement reveals details in the grey-level region of interest; finally, a filter for edge enhancement permits to recover some details lost in the previous steps, achieving satisfactory results for the painted sherd samples analyzed. In order to validate the mean atomic number differences found between each pigment and the ceramic body, X-ray diffraction diagrams have been refined with Rietveld method using the software DIFFRACplus Topas, arriving to mineralogical differences which agree with the results obtained. As a consequence of this study, the program developed has proven to be a suitable tool for routine analysis of samples with slight chemical contrast.
Fish gills are constituted by primary filaments and secondary lamellae, which are formed, basically, by three different cell types: pillar cells, respiratory cells and erythrocytes that circulate in the lamellae interior. This respiratory organ is very appreciated in environmental studies since it is constantly in contact with the water, accomplishing exchanges; besides this, it presents a high adaptation capacity. In this work, some fishes were reared in polluted waters treated by the flotation method (treated group) and compared with others that were reared in clean waters (control group). The ultramorphological, histological and histochemical analyses were used. The fishes from the treated group presented morphological alterations when compared with the control groups, such as lamellar fusion, aneurism and detachment of the respiratory epithelium. These alterations demonstrate the several adaptations, as morphologic as physiologic, that fishes can present when exposed to an inappropriate environment. The techniques employed are good tools to detect morphological biomarkers in gills of Oreochromis niloticus submitted to polluted waters.
The physiological performance and ultrastructural integrity of the vegetative freshwater green alga Zygnema sp., growing under ambient polar day solar radiation and after exposure to experimentally low radiation, but with high UVR:PAR ratio were investigated. In the laboratory, algae were exposed to low photosynthetic active radiation (PAR=P, 400-700 nm, 20 micromol m(-2) s(-1)), PAR + UV-A = PA (320-400 nm, 4.00 W m(-2) = UV-A) and PAR + UV-A + UV-B = PAB (280-320 nm, 0.42 W m(-2) = UV-B) for 24 h at 7 degrees C. Photosynthetic performance and ultrastructure of ambient solar radiation-exposed (field control) and experimentally treated Zygnema samples were assessed using chlorophyll fluorescence, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). No significant treatment effect was observed in the photosynthesis-irradiance curve parameters. Exclusion of the UV-B spectrum in the laboratory treatment caused significantly lower effective photosynthetic quantum yield compared to samples exposed to the whole radiation spectrum. TEM revealed no obvious differences in the ultrastructure of field control and laboratory P-, PA- and PAB-exposed samples. Substantial amounts of lipid bodies, visualized by Sudan IV staining, were observed in all samples. Chloroplasts contained numerous plastoglobules. Organelles like mitochondria, Golgi bodies and the nucleus remained unaffected by the radiation exposures. Zygnema is well adapted to ambient solar radiation, enabling the alga to cope with experimental UV exposure and it is expected to persist in a scenario with enhanced UV radiation caused by stratospheric ozone depletion.
The growth and morphological evolution of molybdenum-oxide microstructures formed in the high temperature environment of a counter-flow oxy-fuel flame using molybdenum probes is studied. Experiments conducted using various probe retention times show the sequence of the morphological changes. The morphological row begins with micron size objects exhibiting polygonal cubic shape, develops into elongated channels, changes to large structures with leaf-like shape, and ends in dendritic structures. Time of probe-flame interaction is found to be a governing parameter controlling the wide variety of morphological patterns; a molecular level growth mechanism is attributed to their development. This study reveals that the structures are grown in several consecutive stages: material "evaporation and transportation", "transformation", "nucleation", "initial growth", "intermediate growth", and "final growth". XRD analysis shows that the chemical compositions of all structures correspond to MoO(2).
Animal models of bronchial hyperresponsiveness have been successfully used to investigate the pathophysiology of asthma. When mice are sensitized and challenged with an allergen, such as OVA, they experience symptoms and processes similar to that of humans, and are therefore widely used as asthmatic animal models. In the current study the BALB/c murine asthmatic animal model was used to investigate the histological and ultrastructural changes that occur in the lungs of asthmatic animals that received no treatment, compared to two groups of asthmatic animals that were treated with a homeopathic immunodulator Modul8 and hydrocortisone as positive control, respectively. Eosinophil counts in the bronchial lavage of the animals were also analyzed, since it is known that eosinophil counts are increased in the bronchial lavage in asthma. Results indicated that eosinophil counts were elevated in asthmatic animals compared to the controls, but were found to be significantly decreased in the treatment groups. Also, in the asthmatic, untreated animals, histological and ultrastructural changes, typically associated with the inflammatory process were found. Both treatment groups compared well to that of the control animals, indicating that the homeopathic product might be successfully used in the treatment of asthma.
Chloride cells are responsible for ionic exchanges in the fish gill. These cells have been widely studied, considering its importance in vital functions of the gill, and because they proliferate when exposed to unfavorable environments. One of the main characteristic of these cells is an acidic cytoplasm, which has been used for identification through histochemical techniques with dyes such as Toluidine Blue and Hematoxylin and Eosin. However, these techniques can be problematic, since epithelial cells can, in certain situations, acquire acidic characteristics similar to those of chloride cells, thus staining in a similar way. Among other functions, chloride cells play a role in calcium uptake from the environment, and therefore have a high concentration of this element. Based on this information, this study aims at developing a specific protocol for the identification of chloride cells. With this purpose, the Von Kossa method specific for calcium was used combined with Hematoxylin counterstaining. Chloride cells had cytoplasm slightly stained with Hematoxylin and the presence of dark stained granules dispersed in the cytoplasm resulted from the Von Kossa reaction due to the calcium present in these cells. This was not found in any other gill cell. Thus, the technique used in this study was specific and efficient to identify chloride cells in fish gills.
Changes in the dielectric properties during the thermochromic transition of commercial VO(2) powders were determined in situ, by analyzing the low-loss region of the electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectra in a transmission electron microscope at room temperature (insulator phase) and 100 degrees C (metallic phase). A comparison of experimental EELS spectra and ab initio density-functional theory calculations (WIEN2k code) within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is presented. A characteristic peak around 5.6 eV appears in the energy-loss function in metallic phase, which is absent in insulator phase. The origin of the characteristic peak is analyzed by means of energy-band structure calculations.
The Alzheimer's amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide exists as a number of naturally occurring forms due to differential proteolytic processing of its precursor molecule. Many of the Abeta peptides of different lengths form fibrils in vitro, which often show polymorphisms in the fibril structure. This study presents a TEM based analysis of fibril formation by eighteen different Abeta peptides ranging in length from 5 to 43 amino acids. Spectrophotometric analysis of Congo red binding to the fibrillar material has been assessed and the binding of human erythrocyte catalase (HEC) to Abeta fibrils has also been investigated by TEM. The results show that a diverse range of Abeta peptides form fibrils and also bind Congo red. The ability of both Abeta 1-28 and Abeta 29-40 to form fibrils indicates that there are at least two fibril-forming domains within the full-length Abeta 1-40 sequence, the ability of many Abeta peptides to form Congo red-binding aggregates suggests that there may be up to 4 possible aggregation promoting domains. The binding of HEC was limited to Abeta forms containing residues 29-32. The differing capacities of fibrillar and ribbon-like structures may reflect the accessibility of the 29-32 region and suggest that HEC may be able to discriminate between different forms of Abeta fibrils.
The external morphology of the antennal sensilla of Pteromalus puparum females (Hymenoptera: Pteromalidae) is described using scanning electron microscopy. The antennae of P. puparum females are geniculate in shape, formed from a large, cylindrical scape with a basal radicel fitting into the antennal socket, a shorter, barrel-shaped pedicel and a flagellum composed of 12 subsegments. Eight morphologically distinct types of sensilla were found on the female antennae. These are: nonporous sensilla trichodea types 1 and 2, which are putative mechanosensilla, nonporous sensilla chaetica, which may function as proprioceptors, uniporous sensilla trichodea types 3 and 4, which are presumably contact chemosensilla, basiconic capitate peg sensilla, which probably function in thermo-hygro reception, multiporous sensilla trichodea, and multiporous sensilla placodea which are all presumed to be olfactory sensilla.
The Ca(2+)- and oxidative stress-induced mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) plays an important role in phenomena ranging from tissue damage upon infarction to muscle wasting in some forms of dystrophy. The process is due to the activation of a large pore in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Anti-oxidants are considered a preventive and remedial tool, and mitochondria-targeted redox-active compounds have been developed. Plant polyphenols are generally considered as anti-oxidants, and thus candidates to the role of mitochondria-protecting agents. In patch-clamp experiments, easily oxidizable polyphenols induced closure of the MPT channel. In swelling experiments with suspensions of mitochondria, high (20-50 microM) concentrations of quercetin, the most efficient inhibitor, promoted instead the onset of the MPT. Chelators of Fe(2+/3+) and Cu(+/2+) ions counteracted this effect. Fluorescent indicators of superoxide production confirmed that quercetin potentiates O(2)(*-) generation by isolated mitochondria and cultured cells. Since this was not affected by chelating Fe and Cu ions, the MPT-inducing effect can be ascribed to a "secondary", metal ion-catalyzed production of ROS. These results are a direct demonstration of the ambivalent redox character of polyphenols. Their mode of action in vivo cannot be taken for granted, but needs to be experimentally verified.
Many cancer cells have an unusual ability to grow in hypoxia, but the origins of this metabolic phenotype remain unclear. We compared the metabolic phenotypes of three common prostate cancer cell models (LNCaP, DU145, PC3), assessing energy metabolism, metabolic gene expression, and the response to various culture contexts (in vitro and xenografts). LNCaP cells had a more oxidative phenotype than PC3 and DU145 cells based upon respiration, lactate production, [ATP], metabolic gene expression, and sensitivity of these parameters to hypoxia. PC3 and DU145 cells possessed similar Complex II and mtDNA levels, but lower Complex III and IV activities, and were unresponsive to dinitrophenol or dichloroacetate, suggesting that their glycolytic phenotype is due to mitochondrial dysfunction rather than regulation. High passage under normoxia converted LNCaP from oxidative to glycolytic cells (based on respiration and lactate production), and altered metabolic gene expression. Though LNCaP-derived cells differed from the parental line in mitochondrial enzyme activities, none differed in mitochondrial content (assessed as cardiolipin levels). When LNCaP-derived cells were grown as xenografts in immunodeficient mice, there were elements of a hypoxic response (e.g., elevated VEGF mRNA) but line-specific changes in expression of select glycolytic, mitochondrial and fatty acid metabolic genes. Low oxygen in vitro did not influence the mRNA levels of SREBP axis, nor did it significantly alter triglyceride production in any of the cell lines suggesting that the pathway of de novo fatty acid synthesis is not directly upregulated by hypoxic conditions. Collectively, these studies demonstrate important differences in the metabolism of these prostate cancer models. Such metabolic differences would have important ramifications for therapeutic strategies involving metabolic targets.
Glucose intolerance in C57Bl/6 mice has been associated with mutations in the nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (Nnt) gene. It has been proposed that the absence of NNT from mitochondria leads to increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production and subsequent activation of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2). Activation of UCP2 has been suggested to uncouple electron transport from ATP synthesis in pancreatic beta cell mitochondria thereby decreasing glucose tolerance due to decreased insulin secretion through lower ATP/ADP ratios. The hypothesis tested in this paper is that UCP2 function is required for the dysregulation of glucose homeostasis observed in NNT ablated mice. Single and double Nnt and Ucp2 knockout mouse lines were used to measure glucose tolerance, whole animal energy balance and biochemical characteristics of mitochondrial uncoupling. As expected, glucose tolerance was diminished in mice lacking NNT. This was independent of UCP2 as it was observed either in the presence or absence of UCP2. The range of metabolic parameters examined in the mice and the proton conductance of isolated mitochondria remained unaltered in this double NNT and UCP2 knockout model. Ablation of UCP2 did not itself affect glucose tolerance and therefore previous observations of increased glucose tolerance of mice lacking UCP2 were not confirmed. We conclude that the decreased glucose tolerance in Nnt knockout mice observed in our experiments does not require UCP2.
The two open reading frames in the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 genome, sll1214 and sll1874, here designated cycI and cycII, respectively, encode similar proteins, which are involved in the Mg protoporphyrin monomethylester (MgProtoME) cyclase reaction. The impairment of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis was examined by separate inactivation of both cyclase encoding genes followed by analysis of chlorophyll contents, MgProtoME levels and several enzyme activities of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis. We additionally addressed the question, whether the two isoforms can complement cyclase deficiency under normal aerobic and micro-oxic growth conditions in light. A cycII knock-out mutant grew without any adverse symptoms at normal air conditions, but showed MgProtoME accumulation at growth under low oxygen conditions. A complete deletion of cycI failed in spite of mixotrophic growth and low light at both ambient and low oxygen, but resulted in accumulation of 150 and 28 times more MgProtoME, respectively, and circa 60% of the wild-type chlorophyll content. The CycI deficiency induced a feedback-controlled limitation of the metabolic flow in the tetrapyrrole biosynthetic pathway by reduced ALA synthesis and Fe chelatase activity. Ectopic expression of the CycI protein restored the wild-type phenotype in cycI(-) mutant cells under ambient air as well as micro-oxic growth conditions. Overexpressed CycII protein could not compensate for cycI(-) mutation under micro-oxic and aerobic growth conditions, but complemented the cycII knock-out mutant as indicated by wild-type MgProtoME and chlorophyll levels. Our findings indicate the essential contribution of CycI to the cyclase reaction at ambient and low oxygen conditions, while low oxygen conditions additionally require CycII for the cyclase activity.
The kinetics and thermodynamics of forward and reverse electron transfer around the reaction center of purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides were studied in vivo by flash-excited delayed fluorescence, prompt fluorescence (induction) and kinetic difference absorption. By protection of the photomultiplier from intense bacteriochlorophyll prompt fluorescence evoked by laser excitation, the time resolution of the fluorometer was reduced typically 10 micros. Two precursor states of the delayed fluorescence were identified: P(+)Q(A)(-) and cyt c(2)(3+)Q(A)(-) whose enthalpy levels were 340 meV and 1020 meV below A, respectively. The free energy of the P(+)Q(A)(-) state relative to A* was -870 meV in whole cells. Similar values were obtained earlier for isolated reaction center and chromatophore. The free energies of cyt c(2)(3+)Q(A)(-) and P(+)Q(A)(-) states showed no or very weak (-6 meV/pH unit) pH-dependence, respectively, supporting the concept of pH-independent redox midpoint potential of Q(A)/Q(A)(-) in intact cells. In accordance with the multiphasic kinetics of delayed fluorescence, the kinetics of re-opening of the closed reaction center is also complex (it extends up to 1 s) as a consequence of acceptor and donor-side reactions. The control of charge export from the reaction center by light regime, redox agents and inhibitors is investigated. The complex kinetics may arise from the distribution of quinones in different redox states on the acceptor side (Q(B) binding site and pool) and from organization of electron transfer components in supercomplexes.
This paper deals with kinetics and properties of variable fluorescence in leaves and thylakoids upon excitation with low intensity multi-turnover actinic light pulses corresponding with an excitation rate of about 10 Hz. These show a relatively small and amply documented rise in the sub-s time range towards the plateau level F(pl) followed by a delayed and S-shaped rise towards a steady state level F(m) which is between three and four fold the initial dark fluorescence level F(o). Properties of this retarded slow rise are i) rate of dark recovery is (1-6 s)(-1), ii) suppression by low concentration of protonophores, iii) responsiveness to complementary single turnover flash excitation with transient amplitude towards a level F(m) which is between five and six fold the initial dark fluorescence level F(o) and iv) in harmony with and quantitatively interpretable in terms of a release of photoelectrochemical quenching controlled by the trans-thylakoid proton pump powered by the light-driven Q cycle. Data show evidence for a sizeable fluorescence increase upon release of (photo) electrochemical quenching, defined as qPE. Release of qPE occurs independent of photochemical quenching defined here as qPP even under conditions at which qPP = 1. The term photochemical quenching, hitherto symbolized by qP, will require a new definition, because it incorporates in its present form a sizeable photoelectrochemical component. The same is likely to be true for definition and use of qN as an indicator of non photochemical quenching.
The cytochrome b(6)f complex is an integral part of the photosynthetic and respiratory electron transfer chain of oxygenic photosynthetic bacteria. The core of this complex is composed of four subunits, cytochrome b, cytochrome f, subunit IV and the Rieske protein (PetC). In this study deletion mutants of all three petC genes of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 were constructed to investigate their localization, involvement in electron transfer, respiration and photohydrogen evolution. Immunoblots revealed that PetC1, PetC2, and all other core subunits were exclusively localized in the thylakoids, while the third Rieske protein (PetC3) was the only subunit found in the cytoplasmic membrane. Deletion of petC3 and both of the quinol oxidases failed to elicit a change in respiration rate, when compared to the respective oxidase mutant. This supports a different function of PetC3 other than respiratory electron transfer. We conclude that the cytoplasmic membrane of Synechocystis lacks both a cytochrome c oxidase and the cytochrome b(6)f complex and present a model for the major electron transfer pathways in the two membranes of Synechocystis. In this model there is no proton pumping electron transfer complex in the cytoplasmic membrane. Cyclic electron transfer was impaired in all petC1 mutants. Nonetheless, hydrogenase activity and photohydrogen evolution of all mutants were similar to wild type cells. A reduced linear electron transfer and an increased quinol oxidase activity seem to counteract an increased hydrogen evolution in this case. This adds further support to the close interplay between the cytochrome bd oxidase and the bidirectional hydrogenase.
In the manganese-depleted photosystem II (PSII[-Mn]) preparations, oxidation of exogenous electron donors is carried out through the high-affinity (HA) and the low-affinity (LA) sites. This paper investigates the LA oxidation site in the PSII(-Mn) preparations where the HA, Mn-binding site was blocked with ferric cations [[11] B.K. Semin, M.L. Ghirardi, M. Seibert, Blocking of electron donation by Mn(II) to Y(Z)(*) following incubation of Mn-depleted photosystem II membranes with Fe(II) in the light, Biochemistry 41 (2002) 5854-5864.]. In blocked (PSII[-Mn,+Fe]) preparations electron donation by Mn(II) cations to Y(Z)(*) was not detected at Mn(II) concentration 10 microM (corresponds to K(m) for Mn(II) oxidation at the HA site), but detected at Mn concentration 100 microM (corresponds to K(m) for the LA site) by fluorescence measurements. Comparison of pH-dependencies of electron donation by Mn(II) through the HA and the LA sites revealed the similar pK(a) equal to 6.8. Comparison of K(m) for diphenylcarbazide (DPC) oxidation at the LA site and K(d) for A(T) thermoluminescence band suppression by DPC in PSII(-Mn,+Fe) samples suggests that there is relationship between the LA site and A(T) band formation. The role of D1-His190 as an oxidant of exogenous electron donors at the LA site is discussed. In contrast to electrogenic electron transfer from Mn(II) at the HA site to Y(Z)(*), photovoltage due to Mn(II) oxidation in iron-blocked PSII(-Mn) core particles was not detected.
Yeast mitochondria have generally been believed not to undergo the permeability transition (PT) by the accumulation of Ca(2+) within the mitochondrial matrix, unlike mammalian mitochondria. However, the reason why the yeast PT is not induced by Ca(2+) has remained obscure. In this study, we examined in detail the effects of Ca(2+) on yeast mitochondria under various conditions. As a result, we discovered that the PT could be induced even in yeast mitochondria by externally added Ca(2+) under optimized experimental conditions. The 2 essential parameters for proper observation of the PT-inducing effects of Ca(2+) were the concentrations of the respiratory substrate and that of inorganic phosphate (Pi) in the incubation medium. The yeast mitochondrial PT induced by Ca(2+) was found to be insensitive to cyclosporin A and suppressed in the presence of a high concentration of Pi. Furthermore, when the PT was induced in yeast mitochondria by Ca(2+), the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria was also observed.
The major light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b complex (LHCII) greatly enhances the efficiency of photosynthesis in green plants. Recombinant LHCII can be assembled in vitro from its denatured, bacterially expressed apoprotein and plant pigments. This makes it an interesting candidate for biomimetic light-harvesting in photovoltaic applications. Due to its almost 20 pigments bound per apoprotein, LHCII absorbs efficiently in the blue and red spectral domains of visible light but less efficiently in the green domain, the so-called "green gap" in its absorption spectrum. Here we present a hybrid complex of recombinant LHCII with organic dyes that add to LHCII absorption in the green spectral region. One or three Rhodamine Red dye molecules were site-specifically attached to cysteine side chains in the apoprotein and did not interfere with LHCII assembly, function and stability. The dyes transferred their excitation energy virtually completely to the chlorophylls in LHCII, partially filling in the green gap. Thus, organic dyes can be used to increase the absorption cross section and, thus, the light-harvesting efficiency of recombinant LHCII.
Sulfite-oxidizing enzymes (SOEs) are crucial for the metabolism of many cells and are particularly important in bacteria oxidizing inorganic or organic sulfur compounds. However, little is known about SOE diversity and metabolic roles. Sinorhizobium meliloti contains four candidate genes encoding SOEs of three different types, and in this work we have investigated the role of SOEs in S. meliloti and their possible link to the metabolism of the organosulfonate taurine. Low level SOE activity (approximately 1.4 U/mg) was present under all conditions tested while growth on taurine and thiosulfate induced high activities (5.5-8.8 U/mg) although S. meliloti cannot metabolize thiosulfate. Protein purification showed that although expression of two candidate genes matched SOE activity patterns, only a single group 2 SOE, SorT (SMc04049), is responsible for this activity. SorT is a heme-free, periplasmic homodimer (78 kDa) that has low homology to other bacterial SOEs. SorT has an apparent k(cat) of 343 s(-1) and high affinities for both sulfite (K(Mapp_pH8) 15.5 microM) and ferricyanide (K(Mapp_pH8) 3.44 microM), but not cytochrome c, suggesting a need for a high redox potential natural electron acceptor. K(Mapp_sulfite) was nearly invariant with pH which is in contrast to all other well characterized SOEs. SorT is part of an operon (SMc04049-04047) also containing a gene for a cytochrome c and an azurin, and these might be the natural electron acceptors for the enzyme. Phylogenetic analysis of SorT-related SOEs and enzymes of taurine degradation indicate that there is no link between the two processes.
Bacterial reaction centers use light energy to couple the uptake of protons to the successive semi-reduction of two quinones, namely Q(A) and Q(B). These molecules are situated symmetrically in regard to a non-heme iron atom. Four histidines and one glutamic acid, M234Glu, constitute the five ligands of this atom. By flash-induced absorption spectroscopy and delayed fluorescence we have studied in the M234EH and M234EL variants the role played by this acidic residue on the energetic balance between the two quinones as well as in proton uptake. Delayed fluorescence from the P(+)Q(A)(-) state (P is the primary electron donor) and temperature dependence of the rate of P(+)Q(A)(-) charge recombination that are in good agreement show that in the two RC variants, both Q(A)(-) and Q(B)(-) are destabilized by about the same free energy amount: respectively approximately 100 +/- 5 meV and 90 +/- 5 meV for the M234EH and M234EL variants, as compared to the WT. Importantly, in the M234EH and M234EL variants we observe a collapse of the high pH band (present in the wild-type reaction center) of the proton uptake amplitudes associated with formation of Q(A)(-) and Q(B)(-). This band has recently been shown to be a signature of a collective behaviour of an extended, multi-entry, proton uptake network. M234Glu seems to play a central role in the proton sponge-like system formed by the RC protein.
The synthetic hexapeptide Ac-Arg-Tyr-Tyr-Arg-Ile-Lys-ol (Ac-RYYRIK-ol) represents a highly potent and selective partial agonist ligand for the nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) peptide receptor (nociceptin receptor, NOPr). Ac-RYYRIK-ol has been labeled with tritium yielding [(3)H]Ac-RYYRIK-ol with exceptionally high specific radioactivity of 94Ci/mmol. The radioprobe is chemically stable even at 24 degrees C in ethanol solution for at least 4 days. No significant decomposition of the [(3)H]ligand occurred under the condition of the binding experiments indicating a fine enzymatic stability of the peptide. Radioreceptor binding studies were conducted using native neuronal NOPr preparation of rat brain membrane fractions and recombinant human nociceptin receptor ((h)NOPr) preparations from cultured Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing (h)NOPr. Specific binding of the compound was reversible, saturable and of high affinity. No cross-reaction with the opioid receptors was observed suggesting superior NOPr selectivity of the ligand. Monophasic isotherm curves obtained in radioligand binding saturation and homologous displacement experiments indicated the presence of single binding sites in both preparations. Average densities of the [(3)H]Ac-RYYRIK-ol recognition sites were 237 and 749fmol/mg protein in rat brain and transfected cells, respectively. Equilibrium affinity values (K(d)s) were determined by three independent way providing identical results. In rat brain membranes K(d)s of 0.3-1.3nM were found depending upon the assay type. In homologous competition studies performed on (h)NOP-CHO cell membranes almost the same binding affinities were measured for Ac-RYYRIK-ol either with [(3)H]Ac-RYYRIK-ol (K(i) 2.8nM) or with [(3)H](Leu(14))nociceptin (2.3nM). A number of NOPr and opioid ligands were screened in heterologous displacement experiments and displayed a rank order of affinity profile being consistent with fairly good NOPr selectivity of the sites labeled by [(3)H]Ac-RYYRIK-ol. Taken together, the high molar activity, improved chemical and biological stability and the capability of the selective and high affinity labeling make this novel radioprobe available for further exploring the biochemical pharmacology and receptor-ligand interaction of the NOP receptor.
Adrenergic alpha(1), alpha(2) and beta receptors are members of the G-protein-coupled receptor families (GPCRs) mediating physiological responses to adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). Since GPCRs are major targets for potential therapeutic agents, development of robust, reliable and cost effective functional screening methods for these receptors is in the focus of pharmacological research. For this reason, the aim of the present study was to develop an intracellular calcium assay for investigating the pharmacology of the alpha(2C) type of adrenergic receptors (alpha(2C)-AR). Although activation of alpha(2C)-AR is not linked to calcium mobilization, co-expression of these receptors with the chimeric Galpha(qi5) protein, containing the five carboxyl-terminal amino acids from G(i), or promiscuosus Galpha(16) protein can divert receptor signaling to the G(q) pathway generating Ca(2+) release from intracellular stores. In order to assess the functional potency of alpha(2)-AR agonists and antagonists, we established a fluorometric Ca(2+) assay using cell lines stably and constitutively co-expressing alpha(2C)-AR and Galpha(qi5) or Galpha(16) proteins (Galpha(qi5)/alpha(2C) and Galpha(16)/alpha(2C)). As part of the pharmacological characterization, we measured the changes in cytoplasmic Ca(2+) levels due to activation of the chimeric Galpha(qi5) or Galpha(16) coupled recombinant alpha(2C) receptors as a function of increasing concentration of several agonists (noradrenaline, brimonidine, oxymetazoline, clonidine, moxonidine) and antagonists (MK912, yohimbine). The binding affinities of alpha(2)-AR agonist and antagonists and the inhibition of the forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation in alpha(2C)-AR expressing cells were also measured. These results confirmed that the Galpha(qi5)/alpha(2C) and Galpha(16)/alpha(2C) recombinant systems can be useful for modelling the native G(i)-coupled system. Our results indicate that a plate-reader based fluorometric Ca(2+) assay may be suitable in high-throughput screening for alpha(2C)-AR ligands as well.
The corpus callosum (CC) is a single anatomical region with homologous cytoarchitecture and divided into four sub-regions such as the rostrum, the genu, the body and the splenium. Neuroimaging analysis revealed that susceptibility to clinical neurological diseases of these sub-regions is variable, indicating biochemical and physiological heterogenecity. To understand the biochemical make up of these regions, we compared the protein expression of these three sub-regional areas [the genu, the body and the splenium (n=9)] through 2D proteomics, which is a high-throughput global protein expression analysis technique. Normative proteomic comparison of gels, and analysis of spectra revealed that 17 (identified as 7 proteins), 35 (identified as 20 proteins) and 39 (identified as 21 proteins) protein spots were differentially expressed in the genu vs. the body, the genu vs. the splenium and the body vs. the splenium, respectively. These results suggest that the sub-regions of the CC differ at the level of protein expression. Identified proteins of the different groups belong to several functional classes such as cytoskeletal, metabolic, signaling, oxidative stress and calcium regulation. Interestingly, oxidative stress defense and glucose metabolic pathways of the splenium are quite different from the genu which might be correlated to region specific vulnerability of neuronal illness. Protein expression maps of these regions can be used as a reference source for future studies to investigate the molecular basis of functional differences and degree of pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases of the CC.
Docosahexaenoic (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic (EPA) acids are n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids with a therapeutic potential for CNS diseases. Here, using an in situ brain perfusion technique in mice, we show that [(14)C]-DHA and [(14)C]-EPA readily cross the mouse blood-brain barrier (BBB) with brain transport coefficients (Clup) of 48+/-3microlg(-1)s(-1) and 52+/-4microlg(-1)s(-1), respectively. Mechanical capillary depletion of brain homogenates showed that less than 10% of [(14)C]-DHA or [(14)C]-EPA remained in endothelial cells of the brain vasculature, demonstrating that both molecules fully crossed the BBB. Addition of bovine serum albumin decreased the Clup of [(14)C]-DHA to 0.6+/-0.3microlg(-1)s(-1), indicating that binding to albumin reduced importantly, but not totally, the passage of DHA through the BBB. The Clup of [(14)C]-DHA or [(14)C]-EPA was not saturable at concentration up to 100microM, suggesting that these compounds crossed the BBB by simple diffusion. However, long-term high-DHA dietary consumption reduced the Clup of [(14)C]-DHA to 33+/-6microlg(-1)s(-1) (-20%, p<0.01). These results confirm that the brain uptake of DHA or EPA perfused with a physiological buffer is comparable to highly diffusible drugs like diazepam, and can be modulated by albumin binding and chronic dietary DHA intake.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma stimulation provides protection in several models of neurological disorders, but the mechanisms underlying these effects remain to be fully elucidated. Here we have studied whether two PPARgamma agonists, pioglitazone and rosiglitazone, prevent loss of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells transiently exposed to glucose deprivation (GD). Nanomolar drug concentrations prevented GD-induced cell loss in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. These effects were abolished by malonate, a reversible mitochondrial Complex II inhibitor, while significantly potentiated by pyruvate, thus suggesting that they are related to mitochondrial function. During cell pretreatment, PPARgamma agonists promoted biogenesis of functional mitochondria, as indicated by the up-regulation of PPARgamma coactivator (PGC)-1alpha, NRF1, TFAM, cytochrome c oxidase subunit (CO) I and CO IV, and the increased level of mtDNA, while did not significantly change mitochondrial membrane potential. In addition, the analysis of the concentration-response and time-course curves for the protective effects and the up-regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis markers suggests that mitochondrial biogenesis and cell loss prevention are related effects. In conclusion our data indicate that a prolonged PPARgamma stimulation, by repeated administration of nanomolar pioglitazone or rosiglitazone concentrations, decreases GD-induced loss of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. In addition, they suggest that mitochondrial biogenesis may contribute to these effects.
The intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration of ouabain (a Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase inhibitor) in rats has been suggested to mimic some symptoms of human bipolar mania. Clinical studies have shown that bipolar disorder may be related to mitochondrial dysfunction. Herein, we investigated the behavioral and biochemical effects induced by the ICV administration of ouabain in rats. To achieve this aim, the effects of ouabain injection immediately after and 7 days following a single ICV administration (at concentrations of 10(-2) and 10(-3)M) on locomotion was measured using the open-field test. Additionally, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARSs) and superoxide production were measured in submitochondrial particles of the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, striatum and amygdala. Our findings demonstrated that ouabain at 10(-2) and 10(-3)M induced hyperlocomotion in rats, and this response remained up to 7 days following a single ICV injection. In addition, we observed that the persistent increase in the rat spontaneous locomotion is associated with increased TBARS levels and superoxide generation in submitochondrial particles in the prefrontal cortex, striatum and amygdala. In conclusion, ouabain-induced mania-like behavior may provide a useful animal model to test the hypothesis of the involvement of oxidative stress in bipolar disorder.
In the sympathetic nervous system, ATP is a co-transmitter and modulator of transmitter release, inhibiting noradrenaline release by acting on P2Y autoreceptors, but in peripheral tissues the subtypes involved have only scarcely been identified. We investigated the identity of the noradrenaline release-inhibiting P2Y subtypes in the epididymal portion of vas deferens and tail artery of the rat. The subtypes operating as autoreceptors, the signalling mechanism and cross-talk with alpha(2)-autoreceptors, was also investigated in the epididymal portion. In both tissues, the nucleotides 2-methylthioATP, 2-methylthioADP, ADP and ATP inhibited noradrenaline release up to 68%, with the following order of potency: 2-methylthioADP=2-methylthioATP>ADP=ATP in the epididymal portion and 2-methylthioADP=2-methylthioATP=ADP>ATP in the tail artery. The selective P2Y(1) antagonist 2'-deoxy-N(6)-methyladenosine 3',5'-bisphosphate (30microM) and the P2Y(12) antagonist 2,2-dimethyl-propionic acid 3-(2-chloro-6-methylaminopurin-9-yl)-2-(2,2-dimethyl-propionyloxymethyl)-propyl ester (30microM) increased noradrenaline release per se by 25+/-8% and 18+/-3%, respectively, in the epididymal portion but not in tail artery. Both antagonists attenuated the effect of nucleotides in the epididymal portion whereas in tail artery only the P2Y(1) antagonist was effective. The agonist of P2Y(1) and P2Y(12) receptors, 2-methylthioADP, caused an inhibition of noradrenaline release that was not prevented by inhibition of phospholipase C or protein kinase C but was abolished by pertussis toxin. 2-methylthioADP and the adenosine A(1) receptor agonist N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine were less potent at inhibiting noradrenaline release under marked influence of alpha(2)-autoinhibition. In both tissues, nucleotides modulate noradrenaline release by activation of inhibitory P2Y(1) receptors but in the epididymal portion P2Y(12) receptors also participate. P2Y(1) and P2Y(12) receptors are coupled to G(i/o)-proteins and operate as autoreceptors in the vas deferens where they interact with alpha(2)-adrenoceptors on the modulation of noradrenaline release.
Doxorubicin, an approved drug for cancer therapy, was recently found to be a potent agent to augment adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated transgene expression, especially in airway cells. Recombinant AAV type 2 (rAAV-2) has been shown to preferentially transduce neural tissues and is considered as the primary viral vector for the treatments of various neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease (PD). The goal of this study is to investigate whether doxorubicin can be applied to increase the efficacy of rAAV-2 transduction in the central nervous system. We co-administrated doxorubicin with AV2.luc/EGFP into the rat striatum, a preferred target site for PD gene therapy, and found that doxorubicin augmented rAAV-2 transduction dramatically without significant cytotoxicity and alteration of rAAV-2 tropism. By evaluating the effects of doxorubicin on rAAV-2 transduction in PC12 and MN9D neuronal cells, we found that doxorubicin appeared to promote the nuclear accumulation of rAAV-2, but did not affect viral binding or uptake. Our data suggested that doxorubicin might play an important role in modulating rAAV-2 intracellular trafficking in neuron-like cells. Our study also provided the initial in vivo evidence to facilitate AAV-mediated gene expression in the midbrain with the treatment of doxorubicin.
Cognitive function is impaired in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Learning ability is also impaired in rats with hepatic encephalopathy due to portacaval shunts. Long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampus, considered the basis of some forms of learning and memory, is impaired in rats with portacaval shunt. We analyzed the mechanisms by which LTP is impaired in these rats. In control rats, application of the tetanus to induce LTP increases phosphorylation of Thr286 of calcium-calmodulin dependent protein kinase II. This activates the kinase which phosphorylates the GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors in Ser831 and induces its translocation to the post-synaptic densities. All these steps are completely prevented in rats with hepatic encephalopathy in which the tetanus does not induce phosphorylation of CaMKII or GluR1 nor translocation of this subunit to the post-synaptic membrane. This would explain the impairment in LTP in these rats.
The neurotransmitter, serotonin, is involved in several brain functions, including both normal, physiological functions, and pathophysiological functions. Alterations in any of the normal parameters of serotonergic neurotransmission can produce several different psychiatric disorders, including major depression. In many instances, brain neurochemical variables are not able to be studied properly in humans, thus making the use of good animal models extremely valuable. One of these animal models is the Flinders Sensitive Line (FSL) of rats, which has face, predictive and constructive validities in relation to human depression. The objective of this study was to quantify the effect of the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) activation inhibitor, AGN-2979, on the FSL rats (rats with depression-like behaviour), and compare it to the effect on the Flinders Resistant Line (FRL) of rats used as the control rats. The effect was evaluated by measuring changes in regional serotonin synthesis in the vehicle treated rats (FSL-VEH and FRL-VEH) relative to those measured in the AGN-2979 treated rats (FSL-AGN and FRL-AGN). Regional serotonin synthesis was measured autoradiographically in more than 30 brain regions. The measurements were performed using alpha-[(14)C]methyl-l-tryptophan as the tracer. The results indicate that AGN-2979 did not produce a significant reduction of TPH activity in the AGN-2979 group relative to the vehicle group (a reduction would have been observed if there had been an activation of TPH by the experimental setup) in the FSL rats. On the other hand, there was a highly significant reduction of synthesis in the FRL rats treated by AGN-2979, relative to the vehicle group. Together, the results demonstrate that in the FSL rats, AGN-2979 does not affect serotonin synthesis. This suggests that there was no activation of TPH in the FSL rats during the experimental procedure, but such activation did occur in the FRL rats. Because of this finding, it could be hypothesized that TPH in the FSL rats cannot be easily activated. This may contribute to the development of depressive-like symptoms in the FSL rats ("depressed" rats), as they cannot easily modulate their need for elevated amounts of this neurotransmitter, and possibly other neurotransmitters. Further, because these rats represent a very good model of human depression, one can hypothesize that humans who do not have readily activated TPH may be more prone to develop depression.
While the adverse effects of acrylonitrile (AN) on the central nervous system (CNS) are known to be mediated, at least in part, by the generation of free radicals and oxidative stress, there is a paucity of data on region-specific alterations in biomarkers of oxidative stress in the brain of AN-exposed animals. The present study was designed to examine the effects of AN on biomarkers of oxidative stress in several brain regions of adult Sprague-Dawley rats. Daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) treatment of animals to 0 (control, normal saline solution), 25, 50 or 75mgAN/kg body weight for 7 days resulted in statistically significant (p<0.05) increases in the levels of lipid peroxidation product, malondialdehyde (MDA), in the cortex and cerebellum; a statistically significant (p<0.05) decrease MDA levels were noted in the striatum. Contents of reduced glutathione (GSH) were significantly (p<0.05) decreased in cortex, cerebellum and hippocampus. The activities of the antioxidant enzymes, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) were differentially affected by AN and these effects were brain region-specific and AN dose-dependent. Taken together, these data suggest brain region-specific effects of AN on lipid peroxidation, activities of antioxidant enzymes and non-enzymatic antioxidant levels. These effects may provide biochemical evidence for AN-induced neurobehavioral damage and disturbance of monoamine neurotransmitters.
Neural stem cells (NSCs) play a crucial role in the development and maturation of the central nervous system. Recently studies suggest that antipsychotic drugs regulate the activities of NSCs. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying antipsychotic-induced changes of the activity of NSCs, particularly protein expression, are still unknown. We studied the growth and protein expression in haloperidol (HD) and risperidone (RS) treated rat NSCs. The treatment with RS (3microM) or HD (3microM) had no effect on morphology of NSCs after 24h, but significantly promotes or inhibits the differentiation of NSCs after a 96h of treatment. 2-DE based proteomics was performed at 24h, a stage before phenotypic expression of NSCs. Gel image analysis revealed that 30 protein spots in HD- and 60 spots in RS-treated groups were differentially regulated in their expression compared to control group (p<0.05; ANOVA). When these spots were compared between the two drug-treated groups, 23 spots overlapped leaving 7 HD-specific and 37 RS-specific spots. Of these 67 spots, 32 different proteins were identified. The majority of the differentially regulated proteins were classified into several functional groups, such as cytoskeletal, calcium regulating protein, metabolism, signal transduction and proteins related to oxidative stress. Our data shows that atypical RS expressed more proteins than typical HD, and these results might explain the molecular mechanisms underlying the different effects of both drugs on NSCs activities as described above. Identified proteins in this experiment may be useful in future studies of NSCs differentiation and/or understanding in molecular mechanisms of different neural diseases including schizophenia.
It has been shown that endomorphin-2-like immunoreactive (EM2-LI) neurons in dorsal root ganglion play important roles in regulating somatic information transmission. Although EM2-ergic neurons have been found in nodose ganglion (NG) which is mainly involved in transmitting visceral information into the nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS), the neurochemical phenotypes of EM2-ergic neurons have not yet been investigated. In the present study, immunofluorescent histochemical staining showed that 43.5% of the NG neurons contained EM2 and these neurons were small to medium in size. 15.2%, 27.8%, 74.4% and 25.2% of the EM2-LI NG neurons expressed substance P (SP), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), respectively. In addition, about 90.8% of EM2-LI NG neurons also contained mu-opioid receptor (MOR). EM2/MOR and EM2/SP double-labeled peripheral axons were observed in the vagal trunk. Anterograde tracing combined with immunofluorescent staining showed EM2/MOR and EM2/SP double-labeled vagal afferents in the NTS. EM2/MOR/SP and EM2/MOR/CGRP triple-labeled neurons and axons were observed in the NG. Importantly, at the ultrastructrual level, post-embedding electron microscopy revealed that EM2-LI and SP-LI gold particles coexisted in the same large dense-cored synaptic vesicles in the pre-synaptic button, while MOR-LI gold particles existed on both pre- and post-synaptic membranes in the NTS. These results suggest that EM2 in axon terminals of NG neurons might be involved in visceral information transmission and homeostatic control through modulating the release of other neurotransmitters (such as SP, CGRP, NO, VIP) via pre-synaptic MOR and through post-synaptic mechanisms in the NTS.
Abnormal behavior in zinc deficiency and its cause are poorly understood. In the present paper, behavior in the forced swim test and neurochemical changes in the brain associated with its behavior were studied focused on abnormal corticosterone secretion in zinc deficiency. The effect of chronic corticosterone treatment was also studied. Immobility time in the forced swim test was increased in young rats fed a zinc-deficient diet for 2 weeks, as well as corticosterone (40mg/kg/dayx14 days)-treated control rats. The basal Ca(2+) levels in the hippocampus, which were determined by fluo-4FF, AM, were increased in both brain slices from zinc-deficient and corticosterone-treated rats. Serum glucose level was decreased in zinc deficiency and hippocampal glucose metabolism, which is determined by [(14)C]2-deoxyglucose uptake, was elevated. Hippocampal ATP level was not decreased, whereas, the concentrations of glutamate, GABA and glutamine in the hippocampus, unlike the whole brain, were decreased in zinc deficiency. However, the decrease in these amino acids was restored by adrenalectomy prior to zinc deficiency. These results suggest that glucose is insufficient for the synthesis of amino acids in the hippocampus of zinc-deficient rats. It is likely that the neurochemical and metabolic changes in the hippocampus, which may be associated with abnormal corticosterone secretion, is the base of abnormal behavior associated with neuropsychological symptoms in zinc deficiency.
In the chicken, two creatine kinase-type B (B-CK) isoproteins, Ba- and Bb-CK, both of which are derived from a single copy gene by alternative splicing, dimerize in neural tissues. The two isoproteins contain distinct N-terminal portions, but their functional difference remains unknown. We investigated the binding affinities of Ba- and Bb-CK to heparin, hyaluronan and chondroitin sulfates, and examined the influence of these glycosaminoglycans on enzyme activity. Chicken retinal samples analyzed by Western blotting and amino acid sequence study after two-dimensional gel electrophoresis showed that heparin binds Bb-CK, but not Ba-CK, while hyaluronan and chondroitin sulfates showed no interaction with either isoprotein. Using fusion proteins covering the distinct N-terminal portions, we also showed that heparin did not react with the N-terminus of Ba-CK, but did react with that of Bb-CK. Site-directed mutagenesis of basic amino acids found in the N-terminal portion of Bb-CK identified three basic amino acids critical for this binding. Furthermore, heparin dose-dependently inhibited the enzymatic activities of Ba-CK; Bb-CK activities were less intensely inhibited. Hyaluronan and chondroitin sulfates had no effects on the activities of these enzymes. Thus, the N-terminal portion of B-CK is critical to mediate its affinity to heparin and control enzyme activity, which may be important for regulating energy metabolism in neural tissues such as brain and retina, unique organs abundant in heparan sulfates.
Microglia normally exist in a resting state characterized by a ramified morphology, and are responsible for immune surveillance in the CNS. However, the resting microglia rapidly transform towards an activated phenotype in response to brain injury or immunological stimuli. In certain pathological conditions, the unregulated response or over-activation of microglia can provoke severe neuronal damage. Here, we have investigated whether Semaphorin4D (Sema4D/CD100) could function as a potential factor to control activation. Microglia were cultured, activated by bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and then, exposed to Sema4D/CD100 or conditioned medium. We found that Sema4D/CD100 negatively controlled LPS-induced morphological activation. Moreover, intracerebral injection of LPS-induced abundant microglial activated forms in mice lacking Sema4D/CD100. Sema4D/CD100 also inhibited other relevant aspects of cell activation. Treatment with Sema4D/CD100 inhibited the production of nitrites and LPS-induced microglia migration. We also provide evidence that LPS markedly upregulated Plexin-B1 expression in microglia and Sema4D/CD100 stimulated RhoA-activation in LPS-activated microglia. Taken together, these findings suggest a novel role of Sema4D/CD100 in the regulation of microglia activation providing a valuable neuroprotective tool to the CNS.
alpha(2)-Adrenoceptors are involved in various physiological functions, particularly in the cardiovascular system and the central nervous system. Different adrenoceptor subtypes (alpha(2A), alpha(2B) and alpha(2C)) have been recognised and the different subtypes may have role in activation of distinct physiological and pharmacological pathways. Some of the actions of alpha(2)-adrenoceptor stimulants are likely to be mediated exclusively by alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor subtype, like antihypertensive and bradycardic effects. alpha(2A)-Adrenoceptor may have dominant role in sedative and hypothermic actions, in inhibition of gastric acid secretion and gastric motor activity, as well as in stabilisation of thrombus. Besides alpha(2A)-adrenergic receptors alpha(2B) and alpha(2C)-adrenoceptor subtypes may also be involved in some of the classical effects of alpha(2)-adrenoceptor stimulants, like in presynaptic regulation of transmitter release and antinociceptive action. alpha(2B)-Adrenoceptor has dominant role in the vasoconstrictor effect of alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonists, and its activation induces contraction of rat uterus in late pregnancy. alpha(2B)-Adrenoceptor mediates gastric mucosal protective action initiated centrally in the rat, as well as it may have role also in developmental or reproductive processes. alpha(2C)-Adrenoceptor subtypes may be involved in stress-dependent depression and other psychiatric illnesses like attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-together with alpha(2A)-adrenoceptor. alpha(2C)-Adrenergic receptors seem to mediate peripheral actions as well, like venous vasoconstriction. Identification of separate physiological roles for different alpha(2)-adrenergic receptor subtypes could improve design of novel compounds for specific therapeutic goals.
Several signaling pathways are differentially activated during apoptotic cell death. We have previously found that during apoptotic death of cerebellar granule neurons (CGN) induced by potassium deprivation (K5) and staurosporine there is an increase in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The inhibition of ROS generation reduces the extent of cell death. However, remain to be elucidated the mechanisms by which ROS participate in this apoptotic process. On the other hand, it is well known that c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway plays a pivotal role in cell death of several cell types. In the present study we found that K5 activated the JNK pathway and that its inhibition with SP600125 markedly prevented caspase 3 activation, nuclear condensation and cell death induced by K5. In contrast, JNK pathway was not activated by staurosporine and the JNK inhibitor did not affect cell death induced by this stimulus. We also found that JNK inhibition did not affect ROS levels induced by K5 or staurosporine, suggesting that ROS are upstream of JNK pathway activation. Antioxidants increased ASK1 phosphorylation and decreased JNK1/2 and c-Jun phosphorylation induced by K5. According to these results, we suggest that apoptosis induced by K5 is JNK-dependent and mediated by ROS, but apoptosis induced by staurosporine is not dependent on JNK and that the observed ROS generation by staurosporine seems not to be involved in the activation of this signaling pathway.
Our previous work demonstrated dexmedetomidine-activated phosphorylation of extracellular regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK(1/2)) in primary cultures of mouse astrocytes and showed that it is evoked by alpha(2)-adrenoceptor-mediated transactivation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors, a known response to activation of G(i/o)- or G(q)-coupled receptors [Li, B., Du, T., Li, H., Gu, L., Zhang, H., Huang, J., Hertz, L., Peng, L., 2008a. Signaling pathways for transactivation by dexmedetomidine of epidermal growth factor receptors in astrocytes and its paracrine effect on neurons. Br. J. Pharmacol. 154, 191-203]. Like most studies of transactivation, that study used cultured cells, raising the question whether a similar effect can be demonstrated in intact brain tissue and the brain in vivo. In the present study we have shown that (i) dexmedetomidine-mediated ERK(1/2) phosphorylation occurs in mouse brain slices with a similar concentration dependence as in cultured astrocytes (near-maximum effect at 50nM); (ii) intraperitoneal injection of dexmedetomidine (3microg/kg) in adult mice causes rapid phosphorylation of the EGF receptor (at Y845 and Y992) and of ERK(1/2) in the brain; (iii) both EGF receptor and ERK(1/2) phosphorylation are inhibited by intraventricular administration of (a) AG 1478, a specific inhibitor of the receptor-tyrosine kinase of the EGF receptor; (b) GM 6001, an inhibitor of metalloproteinase(s) required for release of EGF receptor agonists from membrane-bound precursors; or (c) heparin, neutralizing heparin-binding EGF (HB-EGF). Thus, in intact brain HB-EGF, known to be expressed in brain, may be the major EGF agonist released in response to stimulation of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors, the released agonist(s) activate(s) EGF receptors, and ERK(1/2) is phosphorylated as a conventional response to EGF receptor activation. Our previous paper (see above) showed that dexmedetomidine evokes no ERK(1/2) phosphorylation in cultured neurons, but neurons respond to astrocyte-conditioned medium (and to EGF) with ERK(1/2) phosphorylation. The present findings therefore suggest that EGF receptor transactivation in astrocytes in the mature brain in vivo is an important process in response to alpha(2)-adrenoceptor stimulation and may lead to phosphorylation of ERK(1/2) both in astrocytes themselves and in adjacent neurons.
Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) has been implicated in the pathophysiology of psychotic disorders. NRG1 exerts its effects via the Ras-MAPK and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-protein kinase B (PI3K-PKB/AKT) intracellular signaling pathways through ErbB receptors. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between NRG1-stimulated AKT phosphorylation and neurocognitive functions in patients with schizophrenia and in patients with other psychotic disorders. B lymphoblasts of patients (n=40) and controls (n=20) were stimulated with NRG1a (65 amino-acid residue recombinant protein from the epidermal growth factor [EGF] domain) for 30-min. The protein isolated from the cells was analyzed by Western blotting. The dependent measure was the ratio of phosphorylated AKT (pAKT) and total AKT at baseline (without NRG1 stimulation) and after NRG1 stimulation (pAKT/AKT). The neurocognitive functions (attention, immediate and long-term memory, language, visual-spatial skills) were evaluated by the repeatable brief assessment of neuropsychological status (RBANS) battery. The results revealed a significantly reduced pAKT/AKT ratio in patients with schizophrenia as compared with healthy controls and with patients with other psychotic disorders. The patients with other psychotic disorders did not differ from the healthy controls. Despite the fact that neurocognitive functions were significantly impaired in the patients, these functions did not reveal significant correlations with the pAKT/AKT ratio. In conclusion, NRG1-induced AKT phosphorylation is decreased in schizophrenia but not in other psychotic disorders. This peripheral marker is not related to neurocognitive functions.
In the present study, the effects of minocycline on progression of encephalopathy and brain edema in rats with acute liver failure (ALF) resulting from hepatic devascularization were studied in relation to the antioxidant action of the drug. ALF rats were sacrificed at precoma and coma stages of encephalopathy along with their appropriate sham-operated controls. Minocycline-treated ALF rats were sacrificed in parallel with comatose vehicle-treated ALF controls. Microglial activation was assessed using CD11b/c (OX-42) immunohistochemistry. Nitrite/nitrate levels in plasma and brain were measured using the Griess reaction. Expression of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) were measured using real-time quantitative PCR and Western blot analysis. Increased nitrite/nitrate levels were observed in the plasma of ALF rats at coma stage of encephalopathy compared to sham-operated controls. Increased expression of HO-1 mRNA and protein was observed in the frontal cortex of ALF rats at both precoma and coma stages of encephalopathy. Significant increases in expression of endothelial (eNOS) and inducible (iNOS) isoforms of NOS mRNA and protein occurred only at coma stages of encephalopathy accompanied by increased brain nitrite/nitrate concentrations. As expected, minocycline attenuated microglial activation as confirmed by decreased OX-42 immunoreactivity, normalized nitrite/nitrate levels in brain and significantly attenuated HO-1, eNOS and iNOS expression. These results indicate that the beneficial effect of minocycline on the neurological complications of ALF is mediated, at least in part, by reduction of oxidative/nitrosative stress.
Glutamatergic neurotransmission is critically involved into the pathogenesis of schizophrenic psychosis, in particular regarding cognitive and negative symptoms. The reported molecular mechanisms include increased glutamate transporter expression and antipsychotic agents such as clozapine were found able to suppress the expression of these genes. So far, the effects of the partial dopaminergic and serotonergic agonist aripiprazole on glutamatergic neurotransmission were never investigated. In a rat animal model of long-term antipsychotic treatment, we analyzed the expression of glutamate transporter genes after treatment with aripiprazole. Groups of 6 male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated for 4 weeks or 4 months with daily oral doses of 10 or 40mg aripiprazole per kg. Using semi-quantitative in situ-hybridization, we assessed the expression of pre- and post-synaptic glutamate transporter genes. Compared to control animals, differential expression levels were found in several cortical and hippocampal regions. The astroglial excitatory amino acid transporter genes EAAT1 and EAAT2 as well as the neuronal transporter EAAT3 were suppressed, while the presynaptic vesicular glutamate transporter vGluT1 was transiently induced in hippocampal subregions and EAAT4 was transiently suppressed in frontocortical areas. These transcriptional effects exerted by aripiprazole may counteract a glutamatergic deficit state and strengthen the neurotransmission of glutamate with positive consequences on cognitive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
Astrocytes are integrated in the complex regulation of neurodegeneration and neuronal damage in the CNS. It is well-known that astroglia produces a plethora of growth factors which might be protective for neurons. Growth factors prevent neurons from cell death and promote proliferation and differentiation of precursor cells. Previous data suggest that astrocytes may respond to toxic stimuli by a selective mobilization of guarding molecules. In the present study, we have investigated the potency of different pathological stimuli such as lipopolysaccharides, tumor necrosis factor alpha, glutamate, and hydrogen peroxide to activate cultured cortical astroglia and stimulate growth factor expression. Astroglial cultures were exposed to the above factors for 24h at non-toxic concentrations for astrocytes. Growth factor expression was analyzed by real-time PCR, oligo-microarray technique, and ELISA. Insulin-like growth factor-1 was selectively down-regulated by lipopolysaccharides and tumor necrosis factor alpha, bone morphogenetic protein 6 by all stimuli. In contrast, lipopolysaccharides, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and glutamate increased leukemia inhibitory factor. Fibroblast growth factor 2 was up-regulated by lipopolysaccharides and tumor necrosis factor alpha and down-regulated by hydrogen peroxide. Besides hydrogen peroxide, all other stimuli promoted vascular epithelial growth factor A mRNA and protein expression. It appears that lipopolysaccharides but not tumor necrosis factor alpha effects on vascular epithelial growth factor A depend on the classic NFkappaB pathway. Our data clearly demonstrate that astroglia actively responses to diverse pathological compounds by a selective expression pattern of growth factors. These findings make astrocytes likely candidates to participate in disease-specific characteristics of neuronal support or damage.
The controversial and limited data on the distribution of dopamine (DA) receptors of type 4 (D(4)) in the human brain prompted us to explore their density and pharmacological characteristics in the prefrontal cortex, striatum and hippocampus, through a series of binding assays. Brain samples were taken during autopsy from seven subjects. Tissue homogenates were incubated with increasing concentration of [(3)H]-YM-09151-2, a D(2)-like receptor antagonist, and L-745,870 and/or sulpiride to define the non-specific binding, while PPAP was used to block sigma receptors. The results showed a low density of D(4) receptors in the hippocampus only, with a preponderance of D(2)/D(3) and sigma receptors in the prefrontal cortex and striatum. In conclusion, these findings underline that it is possible to label D(4) receptors by means of [(3)H]-YM-09151-2, provided that D(2), D(3) and sigma receptors are blocked.
Adenosine is known to act as a neuromodulator by suppressing synaptic transmission in the central and peripheral nervous system. A(3) adenosine receptor (A(3)AR) antagonists were recently considered as potential drugs for the treatment of cardiac ischemia and inflammation diseases. To better understand the chemical features responsible for the recognition mechanism and the receptor-ligand interaction, we have performed the molecular simulation study combined with a virtual library screening process to develop novel A(3)AR antagonists. A series of A(3)AR selective antagonists, including triazolopurines, imidazopurines, pyrrolopurines, and quinazolines were employed to dock into the A(3)AR binding site via AUTODOCK software. The putative binding mode for each compound was proposed. Three main hydrophobic pockets, one hydrogen bonding with Asn250, and one pi-pi interaction with Phe168 for all antagonists were identified. The most favorable binding conformations served as the templates for pharmacophore modeling with Catalyst 4.11 and a virtually generated library have been screened for novel antagonist development.
To study the effect of VEGF overexpression on development of cortical newborn neurons in the brains after stroke, we injected human VEGF(165)-expressive plasmids (phVEGF) into the lateral ventricle of rat brains with a transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). An injection of phVEGF significantly promoted angiogenesis (BrdU(+)-von Willebrand's factor(+)) and reduced infarct volume in the rat brain after MCAO. Single labeling of 5'-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and double staining of BrdU with lineage-specific neuronal markers were used to indicate the proliferated cells and maturation of newborn neurons in the brain section of rats at 2, 4, and 8 weeks after MCAO. The results showed that BrdU positive (BrdU(+)) cells existed in ipsilateral frontal cortex within 8 weeks after MCAO and reached the maximum at 2 weeks of reperfusion. The phVEGF treatment significantly increased BrdU(+) cells compared with the control plasmid (pEGFP) injection. Cortical neurogenesis was indicated by the presence of newborn immature (BrdU(+)-Tuj1(+)), newborn mature (BrdU(+)-MAP-2(+)), and newborn GABAergic (BrdU(+)-GAD67(+)) neurons. All these neurons declined within 8 weeks after MCAO in the controls. Injection of phVEGF significantly increased BrdU(+)-Tuj1(+) neurons at 2 weeks, and BrdU(+)-MAP-2(+) neurons and BrdU(+)-GAD67(+) neurons at 4 and 8 weeks, respectively after MCAO. Moreover, phVEGF treatment significantly increased neurite length and branch numbers of BrdU(+)-MAP-2(+) newborn neurons compared with pEGFP treatment. These results demonstrate that VEGF enhances maturation of stroke-induced cortical neurogenesis and dendritic formation of newborn neurons in adult mammalian brains.
The imbalance in redox equilibrium is associated with several viral diseases however its role in Japanese encephalitis (JE) has not been reported. In the present study, we report the status of oxidant/antioxidant system in different brain regions in rat model of JE. Twelve days old Wistar strain rats were inoculated intracerebrally with a dose of 3x10(6)pfu of JE virus (JEV). The activity of manganese superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and the levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) and malonaldialdehyde (MDA) were estimated in corpus striatum, frontal cortex, thalamus and midbrain on 0, 10 and 20 days post-inoculation (dpi). A significant increase in MDA levels in striatum (p<0.01), cortex (p<0.01), thalamus (p<0.01) and midbrain (p<0.01) was observed in JEV infected rats on 10 and 20dpi compared to controls. The activity of CAT, GPx and the levels of GSH were significantly decreased in all the brain regions studied on 10 and 20dpi compared to controls. However, the activity of Mn-SOD in striatum (p<0.01), cortex (p<0.05), thalamus (p<0.01) and midbrain (p<0.01) were significantly increased on 10 and 20dpi in JEV infected rats compared to controls. The activity of Mn-SOD and MDA levels were significantly increased whereas the activity of CAT, GPx and GSH levels were significantly decreased in all the brain regions studied as the disease progressed from 0 to 20dpi. The maximum alteration in oxidant/antioxidant balance was observed in thalamus and midbrain. The results of the present study demonstrate that antioxidant defense mechanism is impaired after the infection of JE virus suggesting its critical role in cellular injury in brain regions. The findings could be beneficial to understand the role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of JE and therapeutic interventions.
Distribution and functional expression of P2X receptors were analyzed in mouse cerebellum axodendritic fibres, using different experimental approaches such as RT-PCR, western blot, immunochemistry, microfluorimetric experiments and exocytotic studies. RT-PCR and western blot demonstrated the presence of P2X1-4,7 subunits in both whole cerebellum and mouse cerebellar granule cultured neurons. Immunochemistry analysis of tissular and cellular location of P2X1-4,7 receptors confirmed their presence and unequal distribution between somas and axodendritic prolongations. Microfluorimetric experiments using a variety of modulators of the P2X subunits revealed the presence of different functional P2X receptors in the axodendritic fibres. The use of the synthetic agonist alpha,beta-meATP and the antagonist Ip(5)I revealed the activation of functional P2X1 and P2X3 receptors. Responses mediated by P2X1 subunits were also confirmed by using ZnSO(4). Activation of functional P2X4 receptors is observed when stimulated in the presence of ivermectin. Exocytotic studies confirmed the role of most P2X subunits in the activation of neurotransmitter release in axodendritic fibres from mouse cerebellar granule neurons.
The pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD) is complex and is certain to involve diverse etiological factors, but a central role has been strongly suggested for amyloid beta-protein (Abeta), based on genetic, biochemical and neurotoxicological evidence. In contrast with the well-documented effect of genetic mutations in Abeta overproduction, not much is known about the mechanisms involved in sporadic AD (SAD) which account for more than 95% of cases. Extensive data from patients and in vivo animal models indicate that oxidative stress is one of the cardinal factors most frequently associated with this neurodegenerative disease. The aim of the present study was to explore the effect of oxidative stress on the normally expressed wild-type amyloid precursor protein (APP) in human neuroblastoma cells, which represents a more physiological model of neuronal Abeta generation. Since H(2)O(2) is the main source of the highly reactive hydroxyl radical in the brain, and FeCl(2) can stimulate oxidative stress, including the formation of the hydroxyl radical from H(2)O(2), in the present work we studied the effect of these two pro-oxidant molecules on the levels and processing of human APP by alpha-, beta- and gamma-secretase, and the role of the stress-activated kinase c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). We provide evidence for a dual modulation of amyloid precursor protein metabolism in differentiated human neuroblastoma cells related with a down-regulation of alpha-secretase and up-regulation of gamma-secretase, and particularly of beta-secretase and also a JNK depending Abeta generation.
To address the potential impact of presenilin mutations on the prostaglandin metabolism in a neurodegenerative model of glutamatergic excitotoxicity, we injected kainic acid intraperitoneally (30mg/kg body weight) into mice over-expressing the human N141I mutation of presenilin-2, which is known to cause an early-onset form of Alzheimer's disease. We compared the seizure activity as well as seizure lethality in 2- and 6-month-old mice, transgenic for the above-mentioned point mutation, and their wildtype littermates and found that mice harboring the hN141I mutation showed a relative resistance to excitotoxic treatment. This was associated with a constituitively reduced expression of the cyclooxygenases COX-1 and COX-2 in the hippocampus of N141I presenilin-2 mice and a reduced induction of COX-2 expression post-kainate injection. In the past, clinical trials have suggested that both non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which impact upon a cell's prostaglandin metabolism, and glutamatergic antagonists might be of benefit to patients suffering from Alzheimer's-type dementias. Yet, the exact mechanism by which these drugs are beneficial remains unclear, although it seems possible that presenilins might be implicated in the process, at least in the case of early-onset forms. The data presented here strongly support the notion of an implication of presenilins in the alterations in the prostaglandin system, which have been observed in Alzheimer's disease and may contribute to the underlying pathogenesis of the disease.
The Flinders Sensitive Line (FSL) of rats, developed as a line of rats with behavioral supersensitivity to diisopropyl fluorophosphates, a cholinesterase inhibitor, has been used as a rat model of depression. This line has many behavioral and neurochemical similarities to human depression. Because brain regional glucose utilization has been extensively studied in patients with depression with a rather heterogeneous outcome, it became necessary to evaluate this parameter in a well defined and homogeneous animal model. In the present study, the regional glucose utilization measured in thirty-six distinct brain regions and the pineal body was determined in FSL rats and the values were compared to those found in normal Sprague-Dawley (SPD) rats and the Flinders Resistant Line of rats (FRL: animals which have a high resistance to the above noted cholinesterase inhibitor). The measurements were performed by autoradiography with 2-[(14)C]deoxyglucose (2-DG) as the tracer. SPD and FRL groups consisted of six and FSL had 8 rats. The rats were sacrificed 45min following the start of the tracer injection. The results showed that the global, and, in many brain areas, regional, glucose utilization is higher in the FSL rats than in the control SPD rats. The synthesis in the FRL rats was very similar to that of the SPD rats, but it was different in many brain regions from the FSL rats. Because the FSL rats have many neurochemical and behavioral differences, in particular, those parameters having lower values, the results presented here suggest that the biochemical processes in the brain of FSL rats occur with lower efficiency than in either the normal SPD rats or FRL rats.
Both brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and the serotonin receptor 2A (5-HT(2A)) have been related to depression pathology. Specific 5-HT(2A) receptor changes seen in BDNF conditional mutant mice suggest that BDNF regulates the 5-HT(2A) receptor level. Here we show a direct effect of BDNF on 5-HT(2A) receptor protein levels in primary hippocampal neuronal and mature hippocampal organotypic cultures exposed to different BDNF concentrations for either 1, 3, 5 or 7 days. In vivo effects of BDNF on hippocampal 5-HT(2A) receptor levels were further corroborated in (BDNF +/-) mice with reduced BDNF levels. In primary neuronal cultures, 7 days exposure to 25 and 50ng/mL BDNF resulted in downregulation of 5-HT(2A), but not of 5-HT(1A), receptor protein levels. The BDNF-associated downregulation of 5-HT(2A) receptor levels was also observed in mature hippocampal organotypic cultures, excluding confounding effects of BDNF on immature tissue. BDNF +/- mice showed significant increased 5-HT(2A) receptor levels in hippocampus confirming the association between 5-HT(2A) receptor and BDNF levels in vivo. In conclusion, our results point to a regulatory role of BDNF on 5-HT2A receptor levels. This interaction may be an important mechanism in the role of BDNF in affective disorders emphasizing the need for further elucidating the specificity and the mechanism behind this regulation.
Fenamate NSAIDs are inhibitors of cyclooxygenases, antagonists of non-selective cation channels, subtype-selective modulators of GABA(A) receptors, weak inhibitors of glutamate receptors and activators of some potassium channels. These pharmacological actions are all implicated in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke. The aim of this study was to investigate the hypothesis that the fenamate, mefenamic acid, is neuroprotective in an in vitro and in vivo model of stroke. Embryonic rat hippocampal neurons were cultured and maintained for up to 14 days in vitro. At 9 or 14 days, cells were exposed to glutamate (5microM) or glutamate (5microM) plus mefenamic acid (10-100microM) or the control agent, MK-801 (10microM) for 10min. 24h later, cell death was determined by measuring lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels in the culture media. In vivo, male Wistar rats (300-350g) were subjected to 2h middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) followed by 24h reperfusion. Animals received either a single i.v. dose of MFA (10mg/kg or 30mg/kg), or MK-801 (2mg/kg) or saline prior to MCAO or, four equal doses of MFA (20mg/kg) at 1h intervals beginning 1h prior to MCAO. Ischemic damage was then assessed 24h after MCAO. In vitro, mefenamic acid (10-100microM) and MK-801 (10microM) significantly reduced glutamate-evoked cell death compared with control cultures. In vivo, MFA (20mg/kgx4) significantly reduced infarct volume, total ischemic brain damage and edema by 53% (p< or =0.02), 41% (p< or =0.002) and 45% (p< or =0.002) respectively. Furthermore, mefenamic acid reduced cerebral edema when measured as a function of brain water content. MK-801 was also neuroprotective against MCAO brain injury. This study demonstrates a significant neuroprotective effect by a fenamate NSAID against glutamate-induced cell toxicity, in vitro and against ischemic stroke in vivo. Further experiments are currently addressing the mechanism(s) of this neuroprotection.
Guanine derivatives modulate the glutamatergic system through displacement of binding of glutamate to its receptors acting as antagonist of glutamate receptors in moderate to high micromolar concentrations. Guanosine-5'-monophosphate (GMP) is shown to be neuroprotective against glutamate- or oxygen/glucose deprivation-induced neurotoxicity and also against NMDA-induced apoptosis in hippocampal slices. However, in this study we are showing that high extracellular GMP concentrations (5mM) reduced cell viability in hippocampal brain slices. The toxic effect of GMP was not blocked by dipyridamole, a nucleoside transport inhibitor, nor mimicked by guanosine, suggesting an extracellular mode of action to GMP which does not involve its hydrolysis to guanosine. GMP-dependent cell damage was not blocked by P1 purinergic receptor antagonists, neither altered by adenosine A(1) or A(2A) receptor agonists. The blockage of the ionotropic glutamate receptors AMPA or NMDA, but not KA or metabotropic glutamate receptors, reversed the toxicity induced by GMP. GMP (5mM) induced a decrease in glutamate uptake into hippocampal slices, which was reversed by dl-TBOA. Therefore, GMP-induced hippocampal cell damage involves activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors and inhibition of glutamate transporters activity.
Transthyretin (TTR) has been regarded as a neuroprotective protein given that TTR knockout (KO) mice display increased susceptibility for amyloid beta deposition and memory deficits during aging. In parallel, TTR KO mice have increased levels of neuropeptide Y (NPY), which promotes neuroprotection and neuroproliferation. In this work, we aimed at evaluating TTR neuroprotective effect against an excitotoxic insult that is known to be prevented by NPY action. We show that despite a putative neuroprotective role of TTR, hippocampal slice cultures from TTR KO mice display a decreased susceptibility to AMPA-induced neurodegeneration. We also suggest that increased NPY levels in TTR KO mice are not associated with increased cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus or subventricular zone. In summary, the alleged neuroprotective role of TTR in the nervous system should be regarded with caution and should not be generalized to all types of insults.
Microgravity has a unique effect on biological organisms. Organs exposed to microgravity display cellular senescence, a change that resembles the aging process. To directly investigate the influence of simulated microgravity on neuronal original rat PC12 cells, we used a rotary cell culture system that simulates the microgravity environment on the earth. We found that simulated microgravity induced partial G1 phase arrest, upregulated senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-gal) activity, and activated both p53 and p16 protein pathways linked to cell senescence. The amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was also increased. The activity of intracellular antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), and catalase (CAT), was all significantly increased at 12h after the microgravity onset, yet decreased at 96h. Furthermore, concomitant block of ROS by the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine significantly inhibited the microgravity-induced upregulation of SA-beta-gal activity. These results suggest that exposure to simulated microgravity induces cellular senescence in PC12 cells via an increased oxidant stress.
The efficacy of CRT (cardiac resynchronization therapy) can be affected by a number of factors; however, the prognostic significance of the LV (left ventricular) lead position has not been explored. The aim of the present study was to examine whether a PL (posterolateral) lead position has an additional value to systolic dyssynchrony in predicting a better survival after CRT. Patients (n=134) who received CRT were followed-up for 39+/-24 months. The LV lead position was determined by cine fluoroscopy, and baseline dyssynchrony was assessed by TDI (tissue Doppler imaging). The relationship between the LV lead position/dyssynchrony and mortality was compared using Kaplan-Meier curves, followed by Cox regression analysis. The all-cause and cardiovascular mortalities were 38 and 31% respectively. The presence of dyssynchrony and a PL lead position predicted a lower all-cause mortality (29 compared with 47%; log-rank chi2=5.38, P=0.02) and cardiovascular mortality (21 compared with 41%; log-rank chi2=6.75, P=0.009) than when absent. The all-cause mortality was as high as 62% when patients had neither dyssynchrony nor a PL lead position, but was reduced to 29% when both criteria were present, and was between 45 and 46% when only one criterion was present (chi2=6.79, P=0.01). The corresponding values for cardiovascular mortality were 62% when patients had neither dyssynchrony nor a PL lead position, 36-38% when patients had either dyssynchrony or a PL lead position, and 21% when patients had both criteria present (chi2=9.54, P=0.004). Combining dyssynchrony and a PL lead position independently predicted a lower all-cause morality {HR (hazard ratio), 0.496 [95% CI (confidence interval), 0.278-0.888]; P=0.018} and cardiovascular mortality [HR, 0.442 (95% CI, 0.232-0.844); P=0.013]. In conclusion, the placement of the LV lead at a PL position provides additional value to baseline dyssynchrony in predicting a lower all-cause and cardiovascular mortality during long-term follow-up after CRT.
Angiopoietin-2 is an important mediator of angiogenesis, and we hypothesized that genetic variants of ANGPT2 (the gene encoding angiopoietin-2) would result in abnormal angiogenesis and contribute to stroke susceptibility. To test our hypothesis, we investigated the association of variants in the promoter of ANGPT2 with stroke in a multi-centre case-control study. We found that the C allele of rs3739390 conferred a 1.42-fold risk of lacunar infarction {adjusted OR (odds ratio), 1.42 [95% CI (confidence interval), 1.08-1.87]; P=0.012} and a 2.10-fold higher transcriptional activity than did the corresponding G allele rs3739390G. The haplotype G-G-T conferred a 1.54-fold risk of atherothrombotic stroke and a 1.64-fold risk for haemorrhagic stroke, whereas the haplotype G-C-C conferred approx. a 2.0-fold risk of each subtype of stroke. In conclusion, our results indicate that haplotypes in the promoter of ANGPT2 confer a high risk of stroke in a Chinese population.
Ang-(1-7) (angiotensin-1-7), a peptide product of the recently described ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) homologue ACE2, opposes the harmful actions of AngII (angiotensin II) in cardiovascular tissues, but its role in liver disease is unknown. The aim of the present study was to assess plasma levels of Ang-(1-7) in human liver disease and determine its effects in experimental liver fibrosis. Angiotensin peptide levels were measured in cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic patients with hepatitis C. The effects of Ang-(1-7) on experimental fibrosis were determined using the rat BDL (bile-duct ligation) model. Liver histology, hydroxyproline quantification and expression of fibrosis-related genes were assessed. Expression of RAS (renin-angiotensin system) components and the effects of Ang-(1-7) were examined in rat HSCs (hepatic stellate cells). In human patients with cirrhosis, both plasma Ang-(1-7) and AngII concentrations were markedly elevated (P<0.001). Non-cirrhotic patients with hepatitis C had elevated Ang-(1-7) levels compared with controls (P<0.05), but AngII concentrations were not increased. In BDL rats, Ang-(1-7) improved fibrosis stage and collagen Picrosirius Red staining, and reduced hydroxyproline content, together with decreased gene expression of collagen 1A1, alpha-SMA (smooth muscle actin), VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), CTGF (connective tissue growth factor), ACE and mas [the Ang-(1-7) receptor]. Cultured HSCs expressed AT1Rs (AngII type 1 receptors) and mas receptors and, when treated with Ang-(1-7) or the mas receptor agonist AVE 0991, produced less alpha-SMA and hydroxyproline, an effect reversed by the mas receptor antagonist A779. In conclusion, Ang-(1-7) is up-regulated in human liver disease and has antifibrotic actions in a rat model of cirrhosis. The ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/mas receptor axis represents a potential target for antifibrotic therapy in humans.
The response of the Arabian Sea to global warming is the disruption in the natural decadal cycle in the sea surface temperature (SST) after 1995, followed by a secular warming. The Arabian Sea is experiencing a regional climate-shift after 1995, which is accompanied by a five fold increase in the occurrence of "most intense cyclones". Signatures of this climate-shift are also perceptible over the adjacent landmass of India as: (1) progressively warmer winters, and (2) decreased decadal monsoon rainfall. The warmer winters are associated with a 16-fold decrease in the decadal wheat production after 1995, while the decreased decadal rainfall was accompanied by a decline of vegetation cover and increased occurrence of heat spells. We propose that in addition to the oceanic thermal inertia, the upwelling-driven cooling provided a mechanism that offset the CO(2)-driven SST increase in the Arabian Sea until 1995.
A survey of a Ligurian tourist harbour was carried out during winter 2006 and summer 2007 in order to study the organic matter (OM) turnover through extracellular enzymatic activity. Seawater and sediments were sampled at six stations, three inside the port boundaries, one outside the port and two in an area influenced by the outflow of a minor river (Boate). The seawater showed OM turnover times similar to other oligo-mesotrophic coastal areas, and low concentrations of chlorophyll-a and inorganic nutrients. The sediments, instead, revealed high OM loads and a predominance of proteolysis. A significant reduction of the OM loads was observed in the outside station, indicating that the OM accumulation was due to the structures and activities of the harbour and to the Boate influence. The OM biotic recycling via enzymatic activity was enhanced especially during summer. Although the carbohydrates were probably highly refractory, their turnover was notably faster, due to glycolytic enzymatic activity that was enhanced more than the proteolytic in both the sediment and in the seawater. This suggested that the removal and recycling of OM were potentially efficient, and prevented the shift to eutrophication of the Rapallo harbour area.
According to the literature, the safe level of a toxic substance for any given organism may be calculated from its median lethal concentration multiplied by a suitable application factor (AF: usually 0.1 and 0.01). The medial lethal concentrations for Litopenaeus vannamei postlarvae exposed to the mixtures in equitoxic proportions of Cd-Hg, Hg-Zn and Hg-Pb were close to one order of magnitude lower than the values calculated from individual toxicity tests, indicating a synergistic effect, while the mixture Cd-Zn showed an antagonistic effect. Exposure to the mixture of Cu, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cd, Hg and Pb caused 63.3% and 100% mortality after 21 and 13 days for 0.05 and 0.1 AF, showing that environmental safe concentrations of toxicants should not be calculated from individual toxicity tests.
Micronuclei (MN), nuclear buds (NB) and fragmented-apoptotic cells (FA) were analyzed in mature peripheral blood and immature cephalic kidney erythrocytes of flounder (Platichthys flesus), dab (Limanda limanda) and cod (Gadus morhua) from 12 offshore sites in the Baltic Sea (479 specimens) and 11 sites in the North Sea (291 specimens), which were collected during three research vessel cruises in December 2002, 2003 and in September 2004. The highest levels of environmental genotoxicity (frequencies of MN up to 0.5 per thousand, NB - up to 0.75 per thousand) and cytotoxicity (FA - up to 0.53 per thousand) were observed in flatfishes from areas close to oil and gas platforms in the North Sea and in zones related to the extensive shipping and potentially influenced by contamination from large European Rivers (Elbe, Vistula, Oder). In dab from the offshore zones of the North Sea, the levels of nuclear abnormalities were higher as compared to those in dab from the Baltic Sea. Responses in immature kidney erythrocytes were higher than in mature erythrocytes from peripheral blood. MN frequency lower than 0.05 per thousand (the Baltic Sea) and lower than 0.1 per thousand (the North Sea) could be suspected as a reference level in the peripheral blood erythrocytes of flatfish.
Intracellular partitioning of trace metals is critical to metal tolerance in aquatic organisms and may also influence metal trophic transfer in ecosystems. In this study, we tested the relevance of metal (Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn) intracellular partitioning in prey as an indicator of metal trophic availability to benthic forage fish, mummichogs (Fundulus heteroclitus), in chronically metal-polluted salt marshes in New York, USA. Two common prey of mummichogs in the study area, Palaemonetes pugio and Nereis acuminata, generally stored increasingly higher proportions of non-essential metals (particularly Pb) in insoluble (less trophically available) cellular components, as the whole body burdens increased. In contrast, intracellular partitioning of essential metals (Cu and Zn) in invertebrate prey varied relatively little among sites. Differential Cd and Pb intracellular partitioning patterns within P. pugio among sites were significantly associated with Cd and Pb whole body burdens in mummichogs, respectively (i.e., prey-driven bioreduction of metals), while bioaccumulation of Cu and Zn in mummichogs was similar among populations. The findings in this study suggest that metal intracellular partitioning within prey may be partially responsible for metal trophic availability to a predator in metal-polluted habitats, while there was also evidence that some predator-dependent processes may offset differential trophic availabilities from prey.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) were measured in sediment cores from 13 locations in South-Western Barents Sea as part of a detailed study of the Norwegian seabed under the MAREANO program. The generally low PAH levels found, an average around 200 ng g(-1) dry weight for sum PAH, indicate low inputs of petroleum hydrocarbons to the marine environment in the area. Differences in PAH composition and various PAH ratios indicate a natural, mostly petrogenic origin of PAH in sediments from the open sea locations, while the fjord locations show higher pyrogenic PAH contents with an increase towards upper sediment layers, indicating low inputs from human activities. Petrogenic PAH levels increase in deeper sediments at open sea locations, also when normalised to total organic carbon (TOC) contents, suggesting natural leakages of oil-related hydrocarbons in the area.
The aim of this study was to test whether silver nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) released into estuarine environments result in increased antibiotic resistance amongst the natural bacterial population in estuarine sediments. A 50-day microcosm exposure experiment was carried out to investigate the effects of Ag-NPs (50 nm average diameter) on the antibiotic resistance of bacteria in sediments from an estuary in southwest England. Experimental microcosms were constructed using 3.5 kg sediment cores with 20 l of overlaying seawater treated with (final) Ag-NPs concentrations of 0, 50 or 2000 microg l(-1) (n=3). Sediment samples were screened at the end of the exposure period for the presence of bacteria resistant to eight different antibiotics. Multivariate statistical analyses showed that there was no increase in antibiotic resistance amongst the bacterial population in the sediment due to the dosing of the microcosms with Ag-NPs. This study indicates that, under the tested conditions, Ag-NPs released into the coastal marine environment do not increase antibiotic resistance among naturally occurring bacteria in estuarine sediments. These results contrast previous findings where antimicrobial effects of Ag-NPs on key bacterial species in laboratory experiments have been demonstrated, and reasons for this are discussed. The negligible effects demonstrated on bacterial populations under the selected estuarine conditions, provide important information on no observed effect concentrations (NOECs) for environmental regulation.
In this study we have investigated protein changes in plasma of juvenile Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) induced by crude North Sea oil and North Sea oil spiked with alkyl phenols and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, a surrogate produced water composition. Using a proteomic approach, we identified 137 differentially expressed proteins at different levels of crude oil exposure. Many of the induced protein changes occurred at low levels of exposure. The results obtained with protein expression profiles after exposure to oil and surrogate produced water indicate effects on fibrinolysis and the complement cascade, the immune system, fertility-linked proteins, bone resorption, fatty acid metabolism as well as increased oxidative stress, impaired cell mobility and increased levels of proteins associated with apoptosis. Although the number of individuals and samples in this study is limited within each treatment group, the protein changes observed in this study represent a first screening for potential biomarker candidates in cod plasma reflecting potential effects of crude oil and produced water exposure on fish.
BACKGROUND: B23/nucleophosmin is present on spindle poles at metaphase. Migration of B23 to the poles is under the control of exportin Crm1. B23 at the centrosome plays a role in the control centrosome duplication. RESULTS: h-Tert-RPE1 cells blocked in prometaphase with low doses of Nocodazol showed a progression to mitosis if Crm1 exportin was inhibited. Under these conditions, the formation of accessory poles containing gamma-tubulin, NuMA (nuclear-mitotic-apparatus) and B23 was induced at metaphase. No effect on centrosome number was observed. In quiescent h-Tert-RPE1 cells, when Crm1 was active, B23 was not detected at the centrosome as well as B23-mutants reported to block centrosome duplication. In addition, the modification of B23 nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling showed no effect on centrosome duplication. CONCLUSION: Inhibition of Crm1 in early metaphase favours the formation of supplementary acentriolar spindle poles. B23 and NuMA are present at these poles that ultimately focus around the centrosome. Inhibition of Crm1 at metaphase has no effect on the control of centrosome numbers.
BACKGROUND: Integrins are transmembrane alphabeta heterodimer receptors that function as structural and functional bridges between the cytoskeleton and ECM (extracellular matrix) molecules. The RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartate tripeptide motif)-dependent integrin alpha8beta1 has been shown to be involved in various cell functions in neuronal and mesenchymal-derived cell types. Its role in epithelial cells remains unknown. RESULTS: Integrin alpha8beta1 was found to be expressed in the crypt cell population of the human intestine but was absent from differentiating and mature epithelial cells of the villus. The function of alpha8beta1 in epithelial crypt cells was investigated at the cellular level using normal HIECs (human intestinal epithelial cells). Specific knockdown of alpha8 subunit expression using an shRNA (small-hairpin RNA) approach showed that alpha8beta1 plays important roles in RGD-dependent cell adhesion, migration and proliferation via a RhoA/ROCK (Rho-associated kinase)-dependent mechanism as demonstrated by active RhoA quantification and pharmacological inhibition of ROCK. Moreover, loss of alpha8beta1, through RhoA/ROCK, impairs FA (focal adhesion) complex integrity as demonstrated by faulty vinculin recruitment. CONCLUSIONS: Integrin alpha8beta1 is expressed in epithelial cells. In intestinal crypt cells, alpha8beta1 is closely involved in the regulation of adhesion, migration and cell proliferation via a predominant RhoA/ROCK-dependent mechanism. These results suggest an important role for this integrin in intestinal crypt cell homoeostasis.
Monocytes/macrophages are critical for both immunity and homoeostasis. They are the outposts of the immune system in detecting invading pathogens or foreign antigens for homoeostatic clearance and antigen processing for the initiation and effector stages of both innate and adaptive immunity. In addition, monocytes/macrophages often function as control switches for immune system balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory reactions. In the beginning of this article, I would like to briefly introduce the achievements of Metchnikoff and Ehrlich in immunology, including Metchnikoff's cell theory, since they have both greatly influenced the advancement of modern immunology. Additionally, I will honour the 100th anniversary of the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Next, I would like to emphasize the concept of the MPS (mononuclear phagocyte system) by examining recent developments regarding the MPS. Thus the article consists of three parts. The first part describes the regulation of growth and differentiation in the MPS. The second part addresses how the key macrophage transcription factor gene PU.1 and the csf1r (colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor gene) play a critical role in haematopoietic myelopoiesis, or the generation of the cells of the MPS. The third part describes PMA-induced monocyte/macrophage differentiation and immune modulation of suppressor macrophages. Finally, this review discusses the latest findings and implications regarding the MPS and macrophages.
Ovochymases have been shown to be present in vertebrates; little information is available at present regarding ovochymase in invertebrates. Here we isolated a cDNA encoding an ovochymase homolog from amphioxus Branchiostoma belcheri, named BbOvc. The cDNA contained a 1248bp open reading frame corresponding to a deduced protein of 415 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of approximately 44.4kDa. Phylogenetic analysis showed that BbOvc was located at the base of its vertebrate counterparts, suggesting that it represents the archetype of vertebrate ovochymases. BbOvc is found to display a tissue- and stage-specific expression pattern, with a predominant expression in the ovary of sexually matured females and in the early stage embryos (1-16-cell embryos). The recombinant ovochymase expressed in vitro shows a trypsin-like activity capable of hydrolysing the trypsin prototypic substrate N(a)-benzoyl-l-arginine ethyl ester (60UBAEE/mg), which can be inhibited by the trypsin-specific inhibitor soybean trypsin inhibitor. It also exhibits an antibacterial activity capable of inhibiting the growth of bacteria like E. coli and V. parahaemolyticus. Taken together, these data indicate that BbOvc is a novel ovochymase with an antibacterial activity and offer first clues to its role as an immune-relevant molecule which may protect the early embryos from pathogenic attacks.
In crustaceans, Kazal-type serine proteinase inhibitors in hemolymph are believed to function as regulators of the host-defense reactions or inhibitors against proteinases from microorganisms. In this study, we report a Kazal-type serine proteinase inhibitor, named hcPcSPI1, from freshwater crayfish (Procambarus clarkii). We found that hcPcSPI1 is composed of a putative signal peptide, an RGD motif, and three tandem Kazal-type domains with the domain P1 residues L, L and E, respectively. Mainly, hcPcSPI1 was detected in hemocytes as well as in the heart, gills, and intestine at both the mRNA and protein levels. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that hcPcSPI1 in hemocytes was upregulated by the stimulation of Esherichia coli (8099) or became decreased after a white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) challenge. In addition, hcPcSPI1 and its three independent domains were overexpressed and purified to explore their potential functions. All four proteins inhibited subtilisin A and proteinase K, but not alpha-chymotypsin or trypsin. Recombinant hcPcSPI1 could firmly attach to Gram-negative bacteria E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae; Gram-positive bacteria Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus thuringiensis and Staphylococcus aureus; fungi Candida albicans and Saccharomyce cerevisiae, and only domain 1 was responsible for the binding to E. coli and S. aureus. In addition, recombinant hcPcSPI1 was also found to possess bacteriostatic activity against the B. subtilis and B. thuringiensis. Domains 2 and 3 contributed mainly to these bacteriostatic activities. All results suggested that hcPcSPI1 might play important roles in the innate immunity of crayfish.
The northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens or Lithobates pipiens) is historically found in most of the provinces of Canada and the northern and southwest states of the United States. In the last 50 years, populations have suffered significant losses, especially in the western regions of the species range. Using a peptidomics approach, we show that the pattern of expressed antimicrobial skin peptides of frogs from three geographically separated populations are distinct, and we report the presence of four peptides (brevinin-1Pg, brevinin-1Pl, ranatuerin-2Pb, and ranatuerin-2Pc) that have not previously been found in skin secretions. The differences in expressed peptides reflect differences in the distribution of alleles for the newly described Brevinin1.1 locus in the three populations. When enriched peptide mixtures were tested for their ability to inhibit growth of the pathogenic amphibian chytrid (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis), peptides from Minnesota or Vermont frogs were more effective that peptides from Michigan frogs. Four of the purified peptides were tested for their ability to inhibit growth of two bacterial pathogens (Aeromonas hydrophila and Staphylococcus epidermidis) and B. dendrobatidis. Three of the four were effective inhibitors of B. dendrobatidis and S. epidermidis, but none inhibited A. hydrophila. We interpret these differences in expression and activity of antimicrobial peptides as evidence to suggest that each population may have been selected to express a suite of peptides that reflects current and past encounters with skin microbes.
Two new interferon stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) family members were identified in a subtractive cDNA library constructed from a mixture of head kidney and spleen of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) stimulated with polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). Two full-length Atlantic cod (Ac) ISG15-2 and AcISG15-3 cDNAs were cloned with rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE). The cDNA sequence of AcISG15-2 encodes a 16.9kDa protein and AcISG15-3 encodes a 18.4kDa protein, both of which possess the characteristic structural features of two tandem ubiquitin-like domains and the LRGG motif necessary for conjugation. Furthermore, the AcISG15-3 protein is expressed with a C-terminal extension in common with the human ISG15 protein. Gene expression analysis using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-qPCR) showed that AcISG15-1, AcISG15-2, and AcISG15-3 transcripts were up-regulated in head kidney after poly I:C stimulation, suggesting that these proteins may be involved in the cod immune response. However, transient expression of myc-tagged AcISG15 proteins revealed differences in their abilities to form conjugates in vitro. We show that AcISG15-2 forms covalent conjugates to a range of cellular protein as a response to poly I:C, recombinant Atlantic salmon IFNa1 (rSasaIFNa1) and infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV), whereas conjugation was absent for AcISG15-1 and AcISG15-3. Thus, these results suggest there are three ISG15 homologues in Atlantic cod and that the three proteins may play different roles in innate immunity.
It has recently been suggested that Dscam (Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule), a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF), plays an essential role in the alternative adaptive immune system of invertebrates. Here, we isolated and characterized the first shrimp Dscam from Litopenaeus vannamei. The LvDscam protein had an extracellular domain but lacked the expected transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail, both of which are found in all other members of the Dscam family (and may also be found in other L. vannamei Dscams that have not yet been isolated). In nervous tissue, expression levels of LvDscam were unexpectedly low. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that LvDscam is far from the Dscams found in other invertebrates. Nevertheless, the domain architecture of the extracellular region of LvDscam is similar to other invertebrate Dscams, and it exhibits the typical configuration of 10 immunoglobulin (Ig) domains, 6 fibronectin type 3 domains (FNIII) and one cell attachment sequence (RGD). Cloning and characterization of a total of 62 cDNAs from hemocytes collected from WSSV-free, WSSV-persistent and WSSV-acute-infected shrimp revealed 23 alternative amino acid sequences in the N-terminal of Ig2, 30 in the N-terminal of Ig3 and 13 in the Ig7 domain. This implies that LvDscam can potentially encode at least 8970 unique isoforms. Further analysis suggested that the LvDscam Ig2 and Ig3 regions are more functionally important than Ig7 in the shrimp's specific immune response against WSSV. We discuss how this tail-less, soluble Dscam can still play an active role in alternative adaptive immune response even while its axonal guidance functionality may be impaired.
In this paper, we report the molecular cloning of a novel stefin analogue from the spleen of large yellow croaker Pseudosciaena crocea (Lycstefin). The open reading frame (ORF) of 297 nucleotides (nt) of Lycstefin encodes a protein of 99 amino acids (aa) with a putative molecular weight of 11kDa, in which no signal peptide and potential N-glycoslation site are predicted. The deduced Lycstefin possesses the structural features of the mammalian stefins, including two conserved motifs known to interact with the active sites of family C1 cysteine peptidases: one glycine in the N-terminal region (G(6)) and Gln-Xaa-Val-Xaa-Gly motif (Q(48)LVAG(52)). It shares 32-47.5% aa sequence identity to the sequences found in mammals and other fish species and is rich in cysteine residues (seven cysteines). Genomic analysis revealed that Lyccys gene, 757 nt long, consisted of three exons and two introns. The Lycstefin gene was constitutively expressed in various tissues examined although at different levels. Upon stimulation with poly(I:C) or inactivated trivalent bacterial vaccine, Lycstefin transcript was significantly up-regulated in spleen and head kidney while down-regulated in blood. Immuno-electron microscopy showed that Lycstefin was mainly localized in the cytoplasm of spleen cells of large yellow croaker, and also in the nucleus. Recombinant Lycstefin protein fused with glutathione S-transferase (rLycstefin) was shown to have strong inhibitory activity against papain with a K(i) of 1.3x10(-13)M. The in vivo experiments revealed that Lycstefin could not modulate the expression levels of large yellow croaker tumor necrosis factor-alpha2 (TNF-alpha2) and interleukin-10 in spleen and head kidney. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the molecular and functional identification of a stefin analogue in bony fish.
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HTCL) is a rare malignancy. Prognosis is poor with only a few case reports of long-term survivors. While HTCL universally involves the bone marrow, the condition has been most often treated with multimodal lymphoma specific chemotherapy. We report a durable, sustained first remission in an adolescent treated for HTCL who received induction therapy according to a high risk T-cell leukemia regimen, a nucleoside analog-based consolidation, and allogeneic transplantation associated with GVHD.
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib, have dramatically improved the outcomes for patients with selected cancers. For imatinib, western blotting of phospho-CrkL was an insensitive, indirect, and descriptive method to determine drug efficacy. Greater use of targeted therapies should involve more quantitative evaluation of the target's dose-inhibition. The Src/Abl kinase inhibitor dasatinib has recently been approved for use in Ph+ leukemias after failure with imatinib. Src family kinases (SFK) also play a critical role in nonhematologic cancers. We have developed a flow cytometric assay to measure SFK autophosphorylation levels in blood mononuclear cells and observed a direct correlation between its inhibition and patient dosage. This method provides a sensitive, quick, and quantitative tool to assess drug efficacy.
A 4(3/4)-year-old male with Down syndrome (DS) presented with unsteady gait and fatigue. Neuroimaging revealed a cerebellar mass with concomitant obstructive hydrocephalus and additional metastatic lesions. He was successfully treated and is still in complete remission 5 years from diagnosis. The present case illustrates that, although not yet reported, medulloblastoma can also occur in patients with DS.
Treatment of patients with ALPS has varied but presently there is no consensus about the optimal therapy. Splenectomy is an option but data regarding the postsplenectomy outcome in pediatric ALPS patients remain very limited. We present two children who suffered from anemia and physical discomfort from the large spleen. Both patients underwent uneventful splenectomy and experienced significant improvement in cytopenia, daily activity and well-being. Furthermore the youngest patient showed a significant catch-up growth. We conclude that in selected patients with marked splenomegaly and ALPS, splenectomy may be considered a treatment option.
Kostmann disease or severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is an autosomal recessive disorder of neutrophil production. Homozygous HAX1 mutations were recently identified in SCN patients belonging to the original family in northern Sweden described by Kostmann. Moreover, recent studies have suggested an association between neurological dysfunction and HAX1 deficiency. Here we describe a patient with a compound heterozygous HAX1 mutation consisting of a nonsense mutation (c.568C > T, p.Glu190X) and a frame-shift mutation (c.91delG, p.Glu31LysfsX54) resulting in a premature stop codon. The patient has a history of neutropenia and a propensity for infections, but has shown no signs of neurodevelopmental abnormalities.
BACKGROUND: Although hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is offered as a curative therapy for pediatric myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), it may cause severe complications and mortality. Several reports have shown the efficacy of immunosuppressive therapy (IST) in adult patients with refractory anemia (RA), but its safety and efficacy remains to be fully elucidated in childhood RA. PROCEDURE: Eleven children diagnosed with RA and enrolled on a prospective multicenter trial conducted by the Japanese Childhood MDS Study Group were eligible for analysis. If patients showed transfusion dependent or suffered from infection due to neutropenia, they received IST consisting of antithymocyte globulin (ATG), cyclosporine (CyA), and methylprednisolone (mPSL). RESULTS: Eight children received IST, 2 received only supportive therapy, and one underwent HSCT without IST. Five (63%) of eight children who received IST showed hematological response. Of note, one patient showed the disappearance of monosomy 7 after IST. Responders were significantly younger than non-responders (29 months vs. 140 months; P = 0.03). No severe adverse events related to IST were reported in this study. Of 6 children with chromosomal abnormalities who received IST, four showed hematological response. The probability of failure-free and overall survival at 5 years was 63 +/- 17% and 90 +/- 9% respectively. CONCLUSION: IST is likely to be a safe and effective modality for childhood RA.
BACKGROUND: To identify predictors for health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in survivors of childhood brain tumors and its relationship to cognitive function. PROCEDURE: One hundred twenty-six consecutive Danish childhood brain tumor patients treated 1970-1997 and being 7.9-40.4 years at follow-up were assessed for general intelligence (IQ) and administered the Minneapolis-Manchester Quality of Life (MMQL) questionnaire. RESULTS: In multivariate linear regression treatment with RT was the most important risk factor for reduced HRQOL. Lower scores for physical functioning and energy, social functioning, cognitive functioning, body image, outlook of life, and intimate relations were significantly related to RT. Tumor location in the posterior fossa was associated with lower scores for physical functioning and energy, and tumor site in the third ventricle region was associated with lower scores for body image. Younger age at diagnosis was associated with lower scores for social functioning and intimate relations, and younger age at follow-up was associated with more physical symptoms. When IQ was included as a covariate, RT only remained significant for social functioning and intimate relations while tumor location in the third ventricle region remained significant for body image, younger age at diagnosis for social functioning and intimate relations, and younger age at follow-up for physical symptoms. In contrasts, neither gender nor presence of hydrocephalus requiring shunt inserted predicted significantly reduced HRQOL in the multivariate analyses. CONCLUSION: RT is an important predictor of HRQOL primarily due to its effect on general intelligence, which suggests that IQ is a strong determinant of HRQOL.
Medulloblastoma, the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor often arises sporadically; however, in a subgroup of patients, there exist familial conditions such as Fanconi anemia with biallelic BRCA2 mutation that predispose patients to developing medulloblastoma. Biallelic inactivation of BRCA2 in Fanconi anemia has been previously described in only 11 patients with medulloblastoma in the literature to date. Here we report two siblings diagnosed with central nervous system embryonal tumors at an early age in association with biallelic BRCA2 inactivation, including the first reported case of a spinal cord primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) in a BRCA2/FANCD1 kindred.
BACKGROUND: Beta thalassemia is one of the most common genetic disorders in the world. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency, characteristics, and pattern of malignancies in patients with beta thalassemia major (BTM) and beta thalassemia intermedia (BTI) in Iran. METHODS: We conducted a multicenter study via a retrospective chart review of patients with BTM and BTI between 2002 and 2007 in four thalassemia centers in Iran. A total of 4,630 records of patients with thalassemia were evaluated. Statistical analyses were done with SPSS software v. 15. P-values <0.05 were considered significant. RESULTS: We detected 11 patients with beta thalassemia who also had malignant disease. Five patients (45.4%) were diagnosed with lymphoma and five with leukemia. The proportion of patients with cancer was higher in those with BTI. Cancer was diagnosed in patients with thalassemia aged 0-39 years, but not in any of the older patients. In patients with thalassemia overall and in patients with BTI, the highest age-specific rate of cancer incidence was seen in children <10 years old, whereas in the BTM group the highest incidence was observed in patients 20-29 years old. There were no statistically significant differences between patients with BTM and BTI and cancer regarding age, sex, splenectomy, hemoglobin, ferritin level, or malignancy type. CONCLUSION: The coexistence of malignancy and beta thalassemia is not rare. Any alarming signs and symptoms including worsening anemia, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy should be a motive for concern because these symptoms may signal malignant disease.
BACKGROUND: Recent guidelines discourage routine use of thrombolytic agents for treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in pediatric patients, but actual practice patterns are unknown. PROCEDURE: An electronic survey was emailed to all active and trainee members of the American Society of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology in April 2008. Respondents were asked a series of multiple-choice questions based on hypothetical case scenarios describing pediatric VTE, pertinent to the implementation of thrombolytic therapy and other professional demographic information. RESULTS: Two hundred eighty-five evaluable responses were obtained (22% response rate) which varied greatly with respect to all spheres of questioning. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was the thrombolytic agent chosen by most respondents, but no clear consensus emerged as to appropriate indications (although preference for thrombolytic therapy increased with severity of the posed clinical scenario), mode of tPA delivery (systemic vs. catheter-directed), dose (high-dose vs. low-dose regimen) or a suitable maximum duration of therapy (range: 1-168 hr; varied according to specific dosing regimen chosen). Expertise in pediatric thrombosis, years out from fellowship training and volume of experience with cases of pediatric thrombosis were not largely associated with respondent choices; however, institutional experience with pharmacologic thrombolysis exhibited the most notable association of the professional demographic factors analyzed. CONCLUSIONS: The survey results support that clinical practice pertaining to use of thrombolytic agents in pediatric VTE varies widely but also provide useful benchmarks to aid clinical decision-making and future clinical trial design. Such varied practices stem from the lack of strong evidence supporting one therapeutic approach versus another.
OBJECTIVE: Loss of immunity to previous vaccination and timing of re-vaccination in children receiving chemotherapy remains controversial. The aim of this study was to investigate the immunity to vaccine preventable diseases in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). PROCEDURE: Sixty-one patients with ALL and 13 healthy siblings were enrolled. Three study groups included newly diagnosed patients (group 1), patients on maintenance chemotherapy (group 2), and patients that completed chemotherapy (group 3). Blood samples for baseline antibody titers were obtained from all the patients and controls. Patients in group 2 were vaccinated with diphtheria, tetanus, and hemophilus influenzae type b (Hib). Patients in group 3 and controls received the measles vaccine in addition to all the above vaccines. In groups 2 and 3, post-vaccination antibody titers were also obtained. RESULTS: Patients and controls had no Hib vaccine during primary vaccination. After chemotherapy median antibody levels against diphtheria, tetanus, measles, and Hib were decreased but tetanus antibodies were still at the protective levels. Proportions of the patients with protective levels were 11.1%, 83.3%, 16.7%, and 16.7% for diphtheria, tetanus, Hib, and measles, respectively. Vaccination achieved protective antibody levels in 81%, 100%, 89.5%, and 70% of the patients for diphtheria, tetanus, Hib, and measles, respectively. Vaccine responses during maintenance were also satisfying. CONCLUSION: We recommend re-vaccination after 3 months of cessation of chemotherapy. Administration of Hib vaccine may be beneficial after the first 3 months of maintenance chemotherapy especially in children with no primary vaccination followed by a second booster dose after cessation of therapy to increase immunity.
OBJECTIVE: Treatment and outcome of infant acute leukemia (IAL) in developed countries have been well documented. However, reports summarizing diagnosis and outcome of IAL in developing countries are limited. METHODS: Five hundred ninety seven pediatric patients were diagnosed with acute leukemia in our hospital between January 1997 and June 2008, of which 19 were younger than 12 months. Data from our 19 cases and the Chinese literature were analyzed. RESULTS: Of the 19 cases, 14 had acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 5 had acute myeloid leukemia (AML) based on FAB classification. Immunophenotyping and molecular genetic analysis were performed in only 6 cases. Only 16% (3/19) of the infants received treatment. Two infants with immunophenotypic AML who abandoned treatment achieved spontaneous remission without chemotherapy within 2 and 4 months respectively. Combining our data with those from Chinese literature, less than one third of the infants had immunophenotypic and genetic verification of leukemia and 29% (18/63) of them received treatment. CONCLUSION: Family financial difficulties and physicians' lack of confidence in treatment outcome in IAL contributed to a high treatment abandonment rate and poor outcome. Public health insurance as well as physician education on current IAL treatment strategies may decrease treatment abandonment in China.
BACKGROUND: PRETEXT is used to stratify risk in children with hepatoblastoma by the Liver Tumor Strategy Group (SIOPEL) of the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP). A recent analysis excluding patients that did not survive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, concluded that PRETEXT was superior to Children's Oncology Group (COG) stage for predicting survival. Puzzled by this result, we made a similar comparison of PRETEXT and COG stage. This time, however, we include all patients, and we compare predictive value at diagnosis, instead of after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. METHODS: Hepatoblastoma patients in INT-0098 were retrospectively reviewed for PRETEXT and other potential prognostic factors including pathologic subtype, and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). RESULTS: Five-year overall survival by PRETEXT was 88.9%, 84.5%, 71.6%, and 30.9%, for PRETEXT I, II, III, and IV, respectively. The 5-year overall survival rates by COG stage were 100%, 97.5%, 100%, 70.2%, and 39.3% for Stage I pure fetal histology (PFH), Stage I unfavorable histology (UH = not PFH), Stage II, Stage III, and Stage IV, respectively. PRETEXT added significant additional prognostic information within the COG Stage III, but not COG Stage IV. Additional prognostic factors statistically significant for an increased risk of death were small-cell-undifferentiated (SCU) histologic subtype and AFP < 100 at diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: PRETEXT, COG stage, SCU histology, and AFP < 100, as assessed at diagnosis, are important determinants of survival that will allow us to better develop common international criteria for risk stratification. Common risk stratification is an essential prerequisite to establish effective cooperation across the ocean in this field of rare tumors.
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a genetic disorder of the immune system caused by inadequate induction of apoptosis via the Fas pathway, mainly characterized by generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and autoimmune cytopenias, as well as increased risk of lymphoma. Although the clinical course of ALPS is highly variable, without treatment long-term prognosis is unsatisfactory for most patients. ALPS has been treated with most of the existing immunosuppressive agents, with variable success. We hereby present a case of a child with ALPS whose greatly enlarged lymph nodes rapidly regressed upon initiation of rapamycin, a novel potential therapeutic agent in the treatment of ALPS.
Neuroblastoma is one of the commonest and most aggressive paediatric malignancies. The majority of children present with metastatic disease for which long-term survival remains poor despite intensive multi-modal therapies. Toxicity from current treatment regimes is already significant, and there is little room to further intensify therapy. Alternative treatment strategies are therefore needed in order to improve survival. Immunotherapy is an attractive therapeutic option for these children as it potentially offers a much more specific and less toxic treatment than conventional therapies. This review discusses the different immunotherapy strategies that may be useful in neuroblastoma, their advantages and disadvantages and the challenges that need to be overcome to successfully use them clinically.
Vibrio vulnificus infection is an uncommon but potentially fatal disease in children such that prompt recognition has prognostic implications. We describe here the case of a 9-year-old female with thalassemia and iron overload who presented with septic arthritis as an atypical initial manifestation of fatal V. vulnificus septicemia. This report underscores the possibility of septic arthritis as an early manifestation of V. vulnificus septicemia. Pediatricians should be alert to this extremely invasive disease, especially in children with iron overload.
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a relatively rare and highly malignant form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) which accounts for 10-15% of these childhood lymphomas. Current treatment protocols for ALCL in children consist of a short course of high intensity polychemotherapy. Here we describe an 8-year-old female with relapsed ALCL who achieved good response with anti-CD25 monoclonal antibody daclizumab. Daclizumab appears to offer a safe treatment option, but further research needs to be conducted in order to define its role in children with ALCL who do not respond to intensive chemotherapy.
Although the epidemiology of malignant bone tumours in children and young adults has been explored, no definitive causation of any specific tumour has yet been identified. We performed a literature review (1970-2008) to find all papers covering possible aetiological factors involved in the development of bone tumours in children and young adults. Several associations have been reported with some consistency: the presence of hernias and Ewing sarcoma; high fluoride exposure and osteosarcoma; and parental farming and residence on a farm, younger age at puberty and family history of cancer for all bone tumours, especially osteosarcoma. Clearly further research is needed to confirm or refute these putative risk factors. It is likely that studies of gene-environment interactions may prove to be the most fruitful of future research.
BACKGROUND: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an emerging tool to assess organ-specific iron load in patients with transfusion dependent anemia. OBJECTIVE: We performed MRI T2 star (T2*) assessment in 44 transfusion dependent patients to study the prevalence of cardiac and liver iron overload and the relationship of T2* measurement with various clinical and biochemical parameters. RESULT: Mean age of the study subjects was 19.9 years (range 8.8-32.3) and the mean cardiac T2* was 23.4 +/- 13.8 msec. Fifty percent of the subjects had abnormal cardiac T2* (below 20 msec). Cardiac T2* was not found to have any correlation with serum ferritin or liver T2*. Liver T2* value was abnormal in 79% of the subjects and it correlated inversely with both current and 12 months average serum ferritin (r = -0.44, P = 0.003; r = -0.46, P = 0.002). Clinical parameters including age, duration of transfusion, age starting iron chelation therapy, and ratio between transfusion volume and desferrioxamine dosage were not correlated with cardiac and liver T2*. CONCLUSION: We conclude that iron overload in heart and liver is common in our transfusion dependent patients. Liver T2* has inverse correlation with serum ferritin. Cardiac T2* does not have any correlation with the various clinical and biochemical parameters.
WT1 is a transcription factor that is aberrantly overexpressed in acute and chronic leukemias. Overexpression of WT1 in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia has been reported, but the prognostic significance is unclear because sample sizes in these studies have been relatively small. WT1 expression was measured by quantitative RT-PCR in samples obtained at diagnosis from 155 pediatric AML patients treated on a cooperative group protocol. Neither overall survival nor event-free survival was correlated with WT1 expression.
AIMS: To examine the efficacy and safety of pegfilgrastim in patients with congenital neutropenia (CN). METHODS: Seventeen patients enrolled in the French Severe CN Register received pegfilgrastim. RESULTS: Median age at pegfilgrastim introduction was 19.1 years (range 3.9-52.3 years). In 14 cases pegfilgrastim replaced GCSF (filgrastim or lenograstim), after a median of 6.9 years of GCSF therapy. The dose of pegfilgrastim was usually one full vial per injection (except in five children, who received 1/6 to 1/2 a vial), resulting in a dose of between 50 and 286 microg/kg. The pegfilgrastim schedule ranged from two injections every 7 days to one injection every 30 days, with treatment-free periods. The median interval between the first and last dose of pegfilgrastim was 0.8 years (0.01-4.1 years). The absolute neutrophil count tended to increase more strongly on pegfilgrastim than on GCSF, but the difference was not statistically significant. During pegfilgrastim therapy, a severe infection occurred in two patients and recurrent ENT infections in two other patients. Bone pain was reported by nine patients, anemia and thrombocytopenia occurred in one patient (WHO grade III), chronic urticaria occurred in one patient (WHO grade III), and a single pegfilgrastim injection was followed by respiratory distress and death 15 days later in a patient with GDSIb. At the last update, 10 patients had stopped receiving pegfilgrastim and seven patients were still receiving pegfilgrastim. CONCLUSION: Compared to conventional GCSF, pegfilgrastim is more difficult to use in congenital neutropenia, with more frequent adverse events and sometimes poor efficacy.
BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids (GCs) play a fundamental role in the treatment of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but therapy with these agents often results in a number of severe side effects. The aim of our study was to evaluate the association between polymorphisms of genes encoding for proteins involved in the pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of these drugs and the occurrence of side effects, in particular infections, in a small population of ALL children. PROCEDURE: Common polymorphisms of NR3C1, ABCB1, glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-M1, GST-P1, GST-T1, and IL-10 genes were analyzed in 36 pediatric patients with ALL, treated according to the AIEOP-BMF ALL 2000 study protocol. Toxicities occurring during the induction and reinduction periods were assessed and their association with genotypes was evaluated. RESULTS: In univariate analysis, the risk of severe infections was increased in subjects with the GST-M1 null genotype, while patients with the GST-M1 normal genotype had significantly more moderate degree infections. The results were confirmed by multivariate analysis. Selection from the reference models of independent variables based on Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) scores maintained the GST-M1 genotype variable in the model to predict severe infections, and the ABCB1 C3435T and GST-M1 genotype variables in the model for moderate infections. CONCLUSIONS: GST-M1 genotype may influence the severity of infections in ALL children during GC administration.
BACKGROUND: As the treatment of Philadelphia positive (Ph+) leukemias in the era of imatinib continues to evolve, the role of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allogeneic-HCT) in first remission is becoming more unclear. PROCEDURE: Thirty-two pediatric centers across the United States and Canada were surveyed regarding current treatment practices for Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). The survey addressed treatment approaches for Ph+ ALL and CML in terms of imatinib therapy and use of allogeneic-HCT. RESULTS: Twenty-three of the 32 centers returned the survey to provide a 72% response rate. Of the 27 physicians responding to the survey, 22 (81%) recommended a matched sibling donor (MSD) allogeneic-HCT, when available, in first remission for Ph+ ALL compared to 17/27 (63%) for patients with first chronic phase CML. There was universal agreement among survey responders regarding the use of imatinib upfront in Ph+ ALL and CML patients while 13 of 27 (48%) physicians reported using imatinib as maintenance therapy post-HCT for Ph+ ALL compared to 9 of 27 (33%) for CML. CONCLUSIONS: Although a treatment consensus did not exist based on the results of this small survey, current treatment practices for pediatric Ph+ ALL and CML appear to favor allogeneic-HCT when a MSD is available. The use of post-HCT imatinib as maintenance therapy to avoid relapse for either Ph+ ALL or CML remains uncertain and awaits future prospective studies.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) has previously been reported in association with other malignancies. The pathogenesis of LCH and its relationship to other malignancies is poorly understood. We present a novel case of a child who developed an LCH bone lesion while receiving a Phase I protocol therapy with oral fenretinide/Lym-X-Sorb (4-HPR/LXS) powder for neuroblastoma.
Little is known on pathways involved in the pathogenesis of choroid plexus tumors (CPTs). The finding of overexpression of Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (Wif-1) prompted us to investigate the functional role of Wif-1 as well as nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin in CPT. In Z310 neoplastic choroid plexus epithelial cells, silencing of Wif1 expression increased proliferative activity not associated with increased canonical Wnt signaling. Nuclear beta-catenin accumulation was also lacking in a series of 16 CPT. In conclusion, our data show that Wif-1 inhibits proliferation of neoplastic choroid plexus epithelial cells, but argue against a role of canonical Wnt/wingless signaling in CPT.
BACKGROUND: Numerous recent reports have described the use of recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) in non-hemophilia bleeding situations for achievement of hemostasis. However, its use in clinical situations other than hemophilia patients with inhibitors has been complicated by some reports of thrombotic events. rFVIIa has been used successfully to treat coagulopathic and/or bleeding neonates. The prevalence of thrombotic events in these neonates is completely unknown. This study was initiated to determine the risk of thrombotic events associated with rFVIIa use in neonates. PROCEDURE: All published literature in non-hemophilic, non-congenital factor VII deficient neonates receiving rFVIIa was reviewed. In addition, all data submitted to the SeveN Bleep Registry, a web-based registry of rFVIIa uses in non-hemophilic children was analyzed. As the baseline risk of thrombotic events in bleeding and/or coagulopathic neonates is not known, we also reviewed the records of 100 consecutive neonates from a single institution who received fresh frozen plasma (FFP) alone to treat their coagulopathy and/or bleeding episode. RESULTS: A total of 134 neonates received rFVIIa. Of these, 10 (7.5%) had a thrombotic event. The baseline risk of thrombotic events in neonates receiving FFP was 7%. CONCLUSIONS: Overall the prevalence of thrombotic events in bleeding and/or coagulopathic neonates appears to be around 7%, whether or not they receive rFVIIa.
BACKGROUND: Lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL) is the second most frequent lymphoma subtype in childhood. It is commonly treated according to therapy strategies for lymphoblastic leukemia. METHODS: The AIEOP LNH-92 protocol was a modified LSA2-L2 therapy used for both T- and B-cell precursor LBL and included Induction, Consolidation, and Maintenance treatment with a total duration of 11 and 24 months for stages I and II, stages III and IV disease, respectively. RESULTS: Fifty-five eligible patients were enrolled, 40 males and 15 females, with a median age of 8 years. Complete remission was achieved in 93% of the cases. With a median follow-up of 9 years the event-free survival (EFS) was 69% and overall survival 72%. EFS of localized disease was 100%. The most frequent grades III and IV toxicity was hematologic and hepatic (elevated transaminases) toxicity. No toxic death nor second tumor were observed. Outcome was comparable to most concomitant international protocols for LBL, but inferior to recent trials that included reinduction treatment or a higher intensity therapy for high stage disease. CONCLUSIONS: AIEOP LNH92 protocol demonstrated similar efficacy compared to contemporary regimens, with limited toxicity. Nevertheless, an intensified treatment is warranted for high stage disease.
BACKGROUND: The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway is the key regulator of angiogenesis. In osteosarcoma baseline VEGF is of proven prognostic value but prognostic potential of post-NACT VEGF expression is largely unexplored. PROCEDURE: Treatment naive patients with osteosarcoma were subjected to initial staging workup followed by three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) and surgery; resected tumors were assessed for histological necrosis by Huvos grading. Initial biopsy and resected tumor specimens post-NACT were examined for VEGF expression by immunohistochemistry. Positive VEGF expression was considered when intensive positive staining was observed in >10% of the tumor cells. VEGF expression at baseline was compared with grade of tumor; pre-NACT and post-NACT VEGF expression were compared with histological necrosis. Receiver operating characteristic curves were generated to assess best threshold and predictability. RESULTS: A total of 31 patients were recruited with median age of 17 years (range 5-66 years); male/female ratio was 25:6; 23 patients (74%) were non-metastatic. At baseline, there was 90% concordance between positive VEGF expression and higher histological grade (28/31); baseline VEGF expression did not correlate well with stage and histological necrosis. Twenty-one (67%) were poor and 10 (33%) were good histologic responders; post-NACT VEGF expression as well as VEGF change following NACT significantly correlated with histological necrosis. CONCLUSION: Positive VEGF expression in surviving tumor cells post-NACT in resected tumors appears to be an important negative prognostic factor in osteosarcoma which may help future therapies to be identified according to the angiogenic potential of the disease.
The development of autoimmune blood cell cytopenias is a potentially life-threatening complication of solid organ transplantation, resulting from T-cell dysregulation from immunosuppressive medications. Conventional treatment with corticosteroids and IVIgG is often unsuccessful as these therapies are unlikely to overcome the T-cell dysregulation. We describe two patients who developed severe autoimmune cytopenias after solid organ transplantation. They had limited response to conventional medications, but had complete resolution of autoimmunity upon transition of immunosuppression from tacrolimus to sirolimus. Altering the immunosuppressive regimen to modify T-cell dysregulation may be beneficial for patients who develop post-transplant autoimmune disease and allow continued preservation of allograft.
Noonan syndrome (NS; MIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant dysmorphic syndrome characterized by distinct facial features, cardiac anomalies, short stature, and motor delay. Activating mutations in PTPN11, encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, are associated with about 50% of cases. Mutations in other genes in the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway are responsible for many of the remainder of cases. While mutations in this pathway are found in a variety of malignancies, including solid tumors, there are few reports of solid tumors in individuals with NS. We report here a patient with PTPN11 mutation-associated NS and a pilocytic astrocytoma.
In children < 2 years of age, cutaneous involvement is the most frequent presentation of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). Cutaneous LCH can be localized or associated with dissemination and organ dysfunction. The clinical course is variable, ranging from spontaneous regression to a fatal outcome. We describe a female newborn presenting with congenital cutaneous lesions who rapidly developed pulmonary infiltrates and multiple osteolytic lesions. Skin biopsy showed a dermal infiltrate of medium to large cells morphologically and phenotypically consistent with LCH. The clinical course was rapidly fatal in spite of chemotherapy. No strict correlation between morphology and prognosis has been documented in LCH, but, in our case, distinct morphological and immunohistochemical features (CD56 expression and no E-Cadherin expression) may have contributed to an aggressive clinical course.
X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) is an immunodeficiency caused by defects in the adaptor molecule SAP. The manifestations of XLP generally occur following Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and include fulminant mononucleosis, hypogammaglobulinemia and lymphoma. In this report, we describe two unrelated patients with fatal T-cell-mediated central nervous system vasculitis for whom repeated serologic and molecular testing for EBV was negative. In both patients, clonal T-cell populations were observed, but neither demonstrated evidence of lymphoma. Thus, loss of SAP function can lead to dysregulated immune responses characterized by the uncontrolled expansion and activation of T cells independent of EBV infection.
BACKGROUND: Red cell exchange (RCE) is part of the management of acute chest syndrome (ACS) in patients with sickle cell disease. The study describes the indications and outcome of the procedure. PROCEDURE: We retrospectively reviewed 53 episodes of ACS in 44 patients who received RCE from January 2003 to October 2006. Patients were aged between 18 months and 19 years. RESULTS: Sixty-two percent of the patients had at least one previous episode of ACS. ACS was diagnosed at presentation in 66%, in the remainder ACS was diagnosed after a median of 2 days. Clinical Respiratory Score (CRS) was assigned retrospectively to assess respiratory distress (0 = no distress, > 6 = severe). Median admission CRS of 2, progressed to 4 before RCE and declined to 2 within 24 hr afterwards. Median day of RCE was day 2 (IQR 1-3) and the main indication was worsening respiratory distress. No patient developed venous thrombosis, alloantibodies or other complications from RCE. Median length of hospitalization was 7 days (IQR: 5-9 days). Patients with a platelet count significantly lower than their baseline on admission had an increased risk of mechanical ventilation. CONCLUSIONS: RCE appears to be a safe and effective treatment for patients with sickle cell disease and ACS. One-third of patients who received RCE for ACS had no respiratory symptoms on admission.
BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy in children and young adults with low cure rates indicating the need to identify further prognostic markers. The importance of methylation in the inactivation of key tumor suppressor genes including RASSF1A has begun to be appreciated in context of cancer development, prognosis and therapy. However there is lack of similar broad based studies in ES. The objective of this study was to analyze RASSF1A methylation and assess its clinical significance in ES. PROCEDURE: The methylation of RASSF1A was determined 31 ES tumor samples and 4 ES cell lines. ES cell lines were also treated with demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine to ascertain its effect on methylation. RASSF1A expression was studied in 12 ES tumors. The association between RASSF1A methylation, clinical parameters and outcome was also analyzed. RESULTS: Methylation of RASSF1A was observed in 21/31 (68%) tumors and in 3/4 ES cell lines. A significant correlation of methylation to reduced expression of RASSF1A was observed in 12 ES tumors analyzed (P = 0.0013) and in all cell lines. ES patients with methylated RASSF1A had worse prognosis compared to the unmethylated group (P = 0.049). Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in the re-expression of the unmethylated form of RASSF1A in two ES cell lines. CONCLUSION: RASSF1A is frequently methylated in ES.
BACKGROUND: Hepatoblastoma is a rare malignancy of childhood. The scarcity of adequate cell models has limited our understanding of this tumor. Here we describe and characterize a new human liver tumor cell line, Hep293TT, derived from an aggressive childhood hepatoblastoma. PROCEDURES: Hep293TT cells were established using primary tumor tissues from a 5-year-old Caucasian female child. This cell line has been maintained for more than 34 months and over 20 subcultures, and was characterized by histopathology, ELISA, genotype, cytogenetics, CGH array, immunohistochemistry, and molecular sequence analyses. RESULTS: Cells were confirmed to originate from parental tumor cells, secrete alpha-fetoprotein, and express hepatic markers and beta-catenin. Hep293TT cells were able to form colonies in soft agar. Tumorigenicity was demonstrated by induction of solid tumors after subrenal capsule injection in immunodeficient mice. Hep293TT cells demonstrated a highly aneuploid karyotype, and a whole genome CGH analysis revealed chromosomal imbalances in every chromosome. Allelotype analysis demonstrated loss of alleles at distal 11p15.5 as is typical of embryonal tumors. Both Hep293TT cells and the primary tumor contain a deletion of 351 nucleotides in beta-catenin, as has been seen in other hepatoblastoma tumors. The cell line expressed beta-catenin protein in both full-length and partially deleted forms, and expressed NOTCH2 protein characteristic of hepatoblasts. No mutation was detected in the APC, MYH, MLH1, or MSH2 genes. CONCLUSION: This cell line, Hep293TT, is a valuable resource for the study of childhood liver cancer and may potentially provide a tool in the development of new agents.
BACKGROUND: The prognosis for recurrent/progressive Ewing sarcoma (ES) remains poor. Pre-clinical, adult phase I and II trials have demonstrated the combination of irinotecan and temozolomide to have schedule-dependent synergy and significant antitumor activity. A pediatric phase I trial has shown this regimen to be safe and active in advanced ES. PROCEDURE: We conducted a retrospective chart review to identify patients with recurrent/progressive ES treated with irinotecan [20 mg/m(2)/day x 5(x2)] and temozolomide (100 mg/m(2)/day x 5) in our institution. The best response achieved, time to progression (TTP), and associated toxicities were recorded. RESULTS: Twenty patients received a total of 154 cycles of therapy. Of 19 evaluable patients, there were 5 complete and 7 partial responses (a 63% overall objective response). Median TTP for 20 evaluable patients with recurrent/progressive ES was 8.3 months; for the subset of 14 patients with recurrent ES, it was 16.2 months. Median TTP was better for patients who sustained a 2-year first remission than for those who relapsed < 24 months from diagnosis and for patients with primary localized vs. metastatic disease. Significant toxicities included grade 3 diarrhea (7 cycles), grade 3 colitis (1 cycle), grade 3 pneumonitis in one patient receiving concurrent whole-lung RT, grade 3-4 neutropenia (19 cycles), and grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia (16 cycles). CONCLUSIONS: Irinotecan and temozolomide is a well-tolerated and active regimen for recurrent/progressive ES. Prospective trials are necessary to define the role of this regimen in newly diagnosed ES.
BACKGROUND: Despite the increasing cure rates for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), patients who relapse continue to have poor prognosis. The Children's Oncology Group (COG) conducted a limited institution Phase II trial of Campath-1H, a monoclonal antibody that targets CD52 on leukemic cells, in children with relapsed or refractory ALL. METHODS: From October 2005 to December 2006, 13 eligible patients were enrolled on the COG phase II study of Campath-1H (ADVL0222). Campath-1H was initially administered as an intravenous infusion over 2 hr, five times per week for 1 week, then three times per week for three additional weeks. Patients with stable disease or better on day 29 could continue on to combination therapy with Campath-1H, methotrexate, and 6-mercaptopurine for two additional cycles. RESULTS: One of 13 patients enrolled had a complete response to Campath-1H and 4 had stable disease. Dose limiting toxicity occurred in two out of nine fully evaluable patients (Grade IV pain and Grade III allergic reaction/hypersensitivity). No patients received combination therapy. Serum Campath-1H concentrations appeared to be somewhat lower in children with ALL compared with adult patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. CONCLUSION: Although a single complete response was observed, activity of single agent Campath-1H appears limited. Our study does not support future single agent evaluation of Campath-1H in children with relapsed ALL.
BACKGROUND: Kinsbourne syndrome or opsoclonus myoclonus syndrome (OMS) is characterized by rapid, involuntary, irregular conjugate eye movements (opsoclonus), myoclonic jerking of the limbs and trunk, ataxia, and behavioral disturbances. In general, the outcome of neurologic and behavioral symptoms is poor. Studies on quality of life (Qol) and recovery after very long-term follow-up of children with OMS are lacking. METHODS: We studied long-term cancer survival, neurologic recovery, and Qol of a consecutive series of eight patients with OMS that were treated in our center. Two cross-sectional follow-up evaluations were conducted at a 3-year interval (T1 and T2). RESULTS: In four out of eight children with OMS a neuroblastoma (NBL) was diagnosed and surgically removed completely. All children received immuno-modulatory therapy, consisting of prednisone (three children), prednisone and ACTH (four children), or prednisone, ACTH, and gammaglobulin (one child). At T1, median follow-up time was 9.5 years (range 3-14 years) after OMS onset and at T2, 11.6 years (range 6-17 years). Neurologic functioning improved in all children, reflected by a significant improvement of the mean Z-score in the motor domain of the Qol questionnaire at T2 as compared to T1. In contrast, seven children continued to have a severe developmental delay at T2. No significant difference in any of the variables was found between NBL survivors and OMS patients without NBL. CONCLUSION: Cognitive and behavioral impairments and not a motor impairment, such as ataxia, appear to be predominant at long-term in children with OMS.
BACKGROUND: Increased activity of multidrug resistance (MDR) genes has been associated with treatment failure in acute leukemias, although with controversial reports. The objective of the present study was to assess the expression profile of the genes related to MDR: ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC3, ABCG2, and LRP/MVP in terms of the clinical and biological variable and the survival of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). PROCEDURE: The levels of mRNA expression of the drug resistance genes ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC3, ABCG2, and LRP/MVP were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR using the median values as cut-off points, in consecutive samples from 140 children with ALL at diagnosis. RESULTS: Expression levels of the ABCG2 gene in the patient group as a whole (P = 0.05) and of the ABCG2 and ABCC1 genes in patients classified as being at high risk were associated with higher rates of 5-year event-free survival (EFS) (P = 0.04 and P = 0.01). Expression levels of the ABCG2 gene below the median were associated with a greater chance of death related to treatment toxicity for the patient group as a whole (P = 0.009) and expression levels below the median of the ABCG2 and ABCC1 genes were associated with a greater chance of death due to treatment toxicity for the high-risk group (P = 0.02 and P = 0.03, respectively). CONCLUSION: The present data suggest a low participation of the drug efflux genes in treatment failure in patients with childhood ALL. However, the low expression of some of these genes may be associated with a higher death risk related to treatment toxicity.
BACKGROUND: This report focuses on the children enrolled on the first North American Intergroup study of APL (INT0129). This study was designed to compare the rates of CR, disease-free survival (DFS), overall survival (OS) and toxicity of therapy with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) for remission induction and/or maintenance compared to conventional chemotherapy in patients with previously untreated APL. PROCEDURE: Fifty-three patients who were documented to have the t(15;17) translocation were able to be evaluated for toxicity of treatment, outcome of induction, and survival. RESULTS: The overall CR rate was 81%. The estimated 5-year DFS from time of CR was 41% for all patients. The estimated 5-year OS for all patients from entry into the study was 69%. The 5-year DFS from time of CR for patients who were randomized to ATRA for induction or maintenance or both was 48% compared to 0% for patients who never received ATRA (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: The most important finding of our study is that a significant DFS advantage exists for children with APL who received ATRA during induction or maintenance or both compared to children who received no ATRA. Furthermore, remissions in these children appear durable as the OS rates are stable at 10 years.
BACKGROUND: The provision of family-centered care (FCC) emphasizes a partnership between parents and health-care providers so that families are involved in every aspect of services for their child. Our study examines factors related to parental perception of the family-centeredness of pediatric oncology services. PROCEDURE: This Canadian multi-institutional cross-sectional study included children with cancer receiving active treatment. One parent from each family provided information about the child, parent/family demographics, diagnosis, and treatment. FCC was measured with the MPOC-20, a valid and reliable tool in the pediatric oncology setting that consists of two subscales: "Family-Centered Service" and "Providing General Information." Logistic multiple regression analyses were used to identify factors that were associated with lower ratings of FCC for each subscale. RESULTS: Completed questionnaires were received back from 411 parents, giving an overall response rate of 80%. Worse perceived prognosis and worse parental psychosocial health were associated with less favorable ratings for both MPOC-20 subscales. In addition, parents who were not married or living common-law scored lower ratings for the Family-Centered Services subscale, whereas scores for the Provision of General Information subscale differed depending on the treatment facility at which the child received care. CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified child/parent factors and health-care delivery factors associated with FCC provided in the pediatric oncology setting. These results could be used as the starting point for future research looking at optimization of the FCC process.
AIMS: To evaluate the relationship between parent- and child-report Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQL) and demographic, tumour and family variables in children with a brain tumour in the first year after diagnosis and to identify determinants of HRQL at 12 months. PROCEDURE: Longitudinal prospective study: Semi-structured interviews took place approximately 1, 6 and 12 months after diagnosis. HRQL was measured using the self- and parent-report PedsQL 4.0 Total Scale Score. Tumour and treatment variables considered included tumour site and grade, hydrocephalus at diagnosis, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Family variables included measures of family function, family support and family stress, the primary carer's coping strategies and symptoms of depression and anxiety. Univariate analyses were used at all three time points, and to identify potential early predictors of HRQL at 1 year. Regression analysis was then used to identify the most important determinants of HRQL at 1 year. RESULTS: Thirty-five patients completed the 12-month interviews. There were consistent significant negative correlations between concurrent family impact of illness and parent and self-report HRQL, and positive correlations between concurrent family support and parent-report HRQL. Treatment with radio- or chemotherapy correlated with child-report HRQL only at some time points. Multivariate analysis showed infratentorial tumour site, and poor HRQL at 1 month best predicted poor self- and parent-report HRQL at 12 months. CONCLUSION: Children with infratentorial tumours and poor HRQL early after diagnosis tend to have poor HRQL at 1 year. While family factors are important modulators of concurrent HRQL, they do not appear important in predicting HRQL.
OBJECTIVE: Unmanipulated haploidentical blood and marrow transplantation has been developed as an alternative transplant strategy for pediatric patients with hematological diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of donor and recipient characteristics on hematopoietic recovery in pediatric patients following unmanipulated haploidentical transplantation. METHODS: Factors correlating with hematopoietic recovery in 133 pediatric patients after unmanipulated haploidentical transplantation were analyzed retrospectively. RESULTS: All patients reached an absolute neutrophil count of 500/microl in a median of 12 days (range, 9-49 days). One hundred thirty-three patients reached an untransfused platelet count of more than 20,000/microl in a median of 15 days (range, 7-180 days). Univariate analysis showed five factors associated with platelet engraftment. These were time to transplantation after diagnosis (P = 0.072), infused nuclear cells/kg of recipient weight (P = 0.028), CD3+ cells/kg of recipient weight (P = 0.082), CD4+ cells/kg of recipient weight (P = 0.083), and CD34+ cells/kg of recipient weight (P = 0.012). Multivariate analysis showed that infused CD34+ cells/kg of recipient weight (CD34+ cells more than 2.42 x 10(6)/kg vs. less than or equal to 2.42 x 10(6)/kg, HR = 1.733; 95% CI 1.222-2.549; P = 0.002) were significantly associated with an increased risk of platelet engraftment. Patients receiving a CD34+ cell dose more than 2.42 x 10(6)/kg had a short time [12 days (range, 7-176 days)] to achieve an untransfused platelet engraftment, compared to 18 days (range, 7-180 days) in patients receiving a lower dose (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that low number of CD34+ cells in allografts is a critical factor associated with delayed platelet engraftment after unmanipulated haploidentical transplantation in pediatric patients.
BACKGROUND: The objective of the study was to investigate the efficacy and tolerability of weekly docetaxel in patients with platinum-refractory recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). METHODS: Patients fulfilling the following criteria were enrolled: histologically confirmed SCCHN; documented progressive disease (PD) after platinum-based treatment; Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 0-2; measurable disease; not candidates for local therapy. Docetaxel (35 mg/m(2)) was administered for 3 weeks, every 4 weeks for a maximum of 6 cycles. RESULTS: A total of 23 patients were treated. All patients were assessable for toxicity and response. The overall response rate was 13.0% (3/23) and disease control rate was 34.7% (8/23). Median progression-free and overall survival (OS) was 9 (95% CI, 7.6-10.4 weeks) and 29 weeks (95% CI, 10.8-47.1 weeks), respectively. Most common hematological toxicities were grade 1-2 anemia (6/23, 26.1%) and nonhematological toxicities were mild and manageable. There was no treatment-related death. CONCLUSION: Weekly docetaxel regimen had good clinical activity with an acceptable toxicity in patients with platinum-refractory SCCHN.
PURPOSE: There is a large need for better pharmacological treatment of neuroendocrine tumors. The aim of this study was to investigate and quantify the cytotoxic potentiating effects resulting from a combination of five substances, NSC 95397, emetine, CGP-74514A hydrochloride, Brefeldin A and sanguinarine chloride, chosen from a previous screening of 1,280 pharmacologically active agents on neuroendocrine tumor cells, with standard cytotoxic agents currently used in the treatment of neuroendocrine tumors. METHOD: The human pancreatic carcinoid cell line BON-1, human typical bronchial carcinoid cell line NCI-H727 and the human atypical bronchial carcinoid cell line NCI-H720 were used. Combinations between doxorubicin, etoposide, oxaliplatin, docetaxel, and each one of the five agents were studied and simultaneous exposures were explored using the median-effect method. RESULTS: Most of the combinations of NSC-95397 and emetine with doxorubicin, etoposide, docetaxel, and oxaliplatin showed synergism, and their remaining combinations were additive. Almost all of the CGP-74514A hydrochloride interactions were additive, while brefeldin A and sanguinarine displayed less synergy but more additive and antagonistic interactions in combination with the standard drugs. CONCLUSION: The synergistic and additive interactions make NSC-95397, emetine, and CGP-74514A hydrochloride potential candidates for incorporation into combination chemotherapy regimens and these drugs might be the suitable candidates for further clinical studies in patients with bronchial carcinoids and pancreatic endocrine tumors.
PURPOSE: PNAS-4, a novel pro-apoptotic gene activated during the early response to DNA damage, can inhibit proliferation via apoptosis when overexpressed in some tumor cells. The objectives of this study were to determine whether PNAS-4 could enhance apoptosis induced by cisplatin besides its induction of apoptosis, and to evaluate the usefulness of combined treatment with mouse PNAS-4 (mPNAS-4) gene therapy and low-dose cisplatin chemotherapy in the inhibition of tumor growth in colon carcinoma (CT26) and Lewis lung carcinoma (LL/2) murine models. METHODS: In this study, the in vitro growth-inhibitory and pro-apoptotic effects of PNAS-4 and/or cisplatin on CT26, LL/2, and SKOV3 cancer cells were assessed by MTT assay, flow cytometric analysis, DNA fragmentation, and morphological analysis, respectively. The in vivo antitumor activity of combined treatment with mPNAS-4 gene therapy and low-dose cisplatin were evaluated in the inhibition of tumor growth in colon carcinoma (CT26) and Lewis lung carcinoma (LL/2) murine models. Tumor volume and survival time were observed. Induction of apoptosis was also assessed in tumor tissues. RESULTS: In vitro, PNAS-4 inhibited proliferation of colon carcinoma (CT26), Lewis lung carcinoma (LL/2) and human ovarian cancer (SKOV3) cell lines via apoptosis, and significantly enhanced the apoptosis of CT26, LL/2, and SKOV3 cells induced by cisplatin. In vivo systemic administration of expression plasmid encoding mPNAS-4 (pcDNA3.1-mPS) and cisplatin, significantly decreased tumor growth through increased tumor cell apoptosis compared to treatment with mPNAS-4 or cisplatin alone. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that the combined treatment with mPNAS-4 plus cisplatin may augment the induction of apoptosis in tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, and that the augmented antitumor activity in vivo may result from the increased induction of apoptosis. The present study may provide a novel way to augment the antitumor efficacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy.
PURPOSE: Nedaplatin is a second-generation platinum showing favorable activity against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) is thrombocytopenia, predicted by creatinine clearance (Ccr). This study was conducted to determine the recommended dose, and evaluate the toxicities, pharmacokinetics and efficacy for elderly NSCLC patients. METHODS: Patients > or =70 years were stratified into two groups based on renal functions: Group A, Ccr > or = 60 and Group B, 40 < or = Ccr < 60. The initial doses were 80 and 60 mg/m(2) in Groups A and B, respectively. The doses were escalated in 20-mg/m(2) increments to 100 mg/m(2) until DLT. RESULTS: Chemotherapy-naïve 39 elderly patients (Group A/Group B: 22/17) received a total of 83 cycles. Major toxicities were hematological. In Group A, one of the 15 patients at 100 mg/m(2) experienced DLT (neutropenia) and the recommended dose was determined at 100 mg/m(2). In Group B, three of the five patients had DLTs (leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and febrile neutropenia) at 100 mg/m(2), and the recommended dose was determined at 80 mg/m(2). The percentage decreases of neutrophil were well correlated with total and free-Pt AUCs. Partial responses were observed in 13 (33%) of the 39 patients, and 12 of the 13 patients who responded had a squamous cell carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS: Nedaplatin was administered simply and feasibly by stratifying renal function and exerted favorable antitumor activity for elderly patients with NSCLC, especially on squamous cell carcinoma.
PURPOSE: Brivanib alaninate is a prodrug of brivanib (BMS-540215), a potent oral VEGFR-2 inhibitor and is currently in development for the treatment of hepatocellular and colon carcinomas. In vitro and in vivo studies were conducted to characterize the preclinical pharmacokinetics and disposition of brivanib and brivanib alaninate, and antitumor efficacy in mice bearing human xenografts. METHODS: In vitro studies were conducted in liver and intestinal fractions, plasma and Caco-2 cells to assess the metabolic stability. Pharmacokinetics of brivanib were determined in preclinical species after administration of single intravenous or oral doses of both brivanib and brivanib alaninate. The antitumor efficacy was assessed at equimolar doses in nude mice bearing human tumor xenografts. Human efficacious dose was predicted based on projected human pharmacokinetic parameters and exposure at efficacious doses in the mouse efficacy models. RESULTS: In vitro and in vivo studies indicated that brivanib alaninate was efficiently converted to brivanib. Brivanib showed good brain penetration in rats consistent with its high intrinsic permeability and lack of active efflux in Caco-2 cells. The oral bioavailability of brivanib varied among species (22-88%) and showed dissolution rate-limited absorption even when combined with organic co-solvents. Administration of brivanib as brivanib alaninate allowed completely aqueous vehicles, and an improvement in the oral bioavailability (55-97%) was observed. The clearance of brivanib in humans is anticipated to be low to intermediate (hepatic extraction ratio < 0.7), while its volume of distribution is expected to be high. The minimum efficacious dose of brivanib alaninate was determined to be 60 mg/kg per day. CONCLUSIONS: Brivanib alaninate is rapidly and efficiently converted to the parent, brivanib, as demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo and offers an excellent mode to deliver brivanib orally.
PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of intravenously (i.v.) calcitriol administered in combination with a fixed oral dose of dexamethasone and gefitinib in patients with refractory solid tumors. METHODS: A fixed oral dose of dexamethasone of 4 mg/day was given every 12 h x 3 doses starting 12 h prior to i.v. calcitriol administration. Calcitriol was administered i.v. over 1 h on weeks 1, 3, and weekly thereafter. The starting calcitriol dose level was 57 microg and escalation occurred in cohorts of three patients until the MTD was defined. Gefitinib was given at a fixed oral daily dose of 250 mg starting at week 2 (day 8). Serum calcitriol PK studies were performed on day 1 (calcitriol + dexamethasone) and on day 15 (calcitriol + dexamethasone + gefitinib). RESULTS: A total of 20 patients were treated. Dose-limiting hypercalcemia was observed in two out of the four patients receiving 163 mcg/week of calcitriol. Mean (+/-SE) peak serum calcitriol concentration (C (max)) at the MTD (125 microg/week calcitriol) was 11.17 +/- 2.62 ng/ml and the systemic exposure (AUC(0-72 h)) of 53.30 +/- 10.49 ng h/ml. The relationship between calcitriol dose and either C (max) or AUC was linear over the 57-163 microg dose range. CONCLUSIONS: The addition of a low dose of dexamethasone allowed the safe escalation of calcitriol to the MTD of 125 microg/week. This dose level resulted in serum calcitriol concentrations that are associated with pre-clinical antitumor activity. However, no antitumor activity was noted clinically in patients with solid tumors.
PURPOSE: In the following, the cellular and molecular mechanism of cytotoxicity induced by prodrug dacarbazine toward the isolated rat hepatocytes was studied. METHOD: Accelerated cytotoxicity screening technique (ACMS) was used to perform this study. RESULT: Addition of dacarbazine to isolated rat hepatocytes resulted in reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation, and lysosomal membrane leakiness before hepatocyte lysis occurred. Hepatocyte ROS generation was inhibited by desferoxamine (a ferric chelator). Cytotoxicity was prevented by antioxidants or ROS scavengers (mannitol or dimethylsulfoxide), cytochorome P450 inhibitors (phenylimidazole, diphenyliodonium chloride, 4-methylpyrazole, and benzylimidazole). In addition to lysosomal damage, dacarbazine caused hepatocyte protease activation and cell proteolysis. CONCLUSION: Dacarbazine cytotoxicity is associated with ROS (H(2)O(2), O(2)(*-) ) generation. It is suggested that H(2)O(2) could cross the lysosomal membrane, react with lysosomal Fe(2+) to form hydroxyl radical (Haber-Weiss reaction) which is the major cause of lysosomal membrane leakiness, proteases, and other digestive enzymes' release and finally the cell death.
PURPOSE: Advanced cancers of the bile duct and gallbladder carry an ominous prognosis. Rebeccamycin analogue (RA) is a novel antitumor antibiotic where phase I trials suggested clinical efficacy in patients with biliary cancers. METHODS: The primary objective was to determine the response rate to RA in patients with advanced gallbladder and bile duct tumors. Secondary endpoints were survival and pharmacokinetic characterization. RA was given at a dose 165 mg/(m(2) day) x 5 days every 3 weeks. RESULTS: Forty-six patients were enrolled. Nine patients were removed from study before their first planned imaging study for response. Two patients had partial responses and 16 had stable disease. On an intent-to-treat analysis the median survival was 6.3 months. A >20% drop in CA19.9 was seen in 43% of patients with initial high levels. Grade 4 neutropenia and thrombocytopenia were seen in 35 and 5% of patients, respectively. Febrile neutropenia occurred in 16% of patients. The pharmacokinetic profile of this trial closely resembles those of prior phase I trials. Measured biliary concentrations of RA were as much as 100x greater than simultaneous plasma concentration. CONCLUSION: Although RA has a response rate of 5% in advanced biliary cancers, it is associated with significant numbers of patients experiencing prolonged stable disease. Biliary concentrations of RA are significantly greater than plasma concentrations.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to clarify the safety and efficacy of combination chemotherapy of uracil-tegafur (UFT) and doxorubicin (UFD regimen), and to identify the prognostic factors in patients with unresectable advanced biliary tract cancer who received systemic chemotherapy. METHODS: Patients with histologically or cytologically confirmed, measurable biliary tract cancer, including intrahepatic or extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, gallbladder cancer, and ampullary cancer, who were not suitable candidates for surgery, were eligible for the study. Patients received oral UFT at 300 mg/m(2) per day divided into two doses on days 1-14 and intravenous doxorubicin at 30 mg/m(2) on day 1. This cycle was repeated every 21 days. The relationship between the patient characteristics and the prognosis was examined. Univariate and multivariate analyses were conducted to identify the prognostic factors associated with survival. RESULTS: Sixty-one patients from 12 institutions were enrolled in the late phase II study between April 2005 and March 2006. Of the 61 patients, 4 patients had partial responses, for an objective response rate of 6.6% (95% CI: 1.8-15.9%); 28 patients had stable disease, 27 had progressive diseases, and 2 patients were not evaluated. The median progression-free survival was 1.6 months, and the overall median survival time was 6.5 months. In the 85 patients who received this UFD chemotherapy in previous and late phase II studies, multivariate analysis revealed the ECOG performance status 1 (P = 0.001), gallbladder as the primary cancer site (P = 0.014), T-factor 4 of the TNM classification (P = 0.035), and elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase levels (P = 0.043) as being associated with a significantly shorter survival. CONCLUSIONS: Combination chemotherapy of UFT and doxorubicin had minimum activity against advanced biliary tract cancer. Performance status was identified as the most important prognostic factor in patients who received systemic chemotherapy.
PURPOSE: This study assessed the role of oxidative stress and loss of glutathione in ABT-737-induced apoptosis. METHODS: Jurkat human acute lymphocytic leukemia cells and HeLa cells transfected with a tet-regulated Bcl-2 expression system were treated with ABT-737 or its less active stereoisomer. GSH concentrations, intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), caspase activation and apoptotic DNA fragmentation were measured. RESULTS: ABT-737 induced oxidative stress through decreased GSH and increased intracellular hydrogen peroxide and superoxide levels. Apoptotic DNA fragmentation and caspase activation were the consequences of this oxidative stress. Combining ABT-737 with ROS-inducing agents such as adaphostin or etoposide enhanced cell death. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that inhibition of Bcl-2 causes a loss of GSH, an increase in ROS, caspase activation and subsequent apoptosis. Clinically, redox alterations as a consequence of Bcl-2 inhibition by ABT-737 should be considered in devising combination therapies with this novel agent or its derivatives.
PURPOSE: To determine the dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) and the maximum tolerated doses (MTDs) of the paclitaxel, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin combination administered biweekly in patients with advanced solid tumors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received escalated doses of paclitaxel (starting dose: 100 mg/m(2)), gemcitabine (starting dose: 800 mg/m(2)) and oxaliplatin (starting dose: 50 mg/m(2)) on days 1 and 15 in cycles of every 4 weeks. DLTs were evaluated during the first cycle. RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients (median age 65 years) with performance status 0-1 were treated on six dose escalation levels. Eleven patients (40.7%) were chemotherapy naïve, six (22.2%) had received 1 prior chemotherapy regimen and ten (37.1%) 2 or more. The DLT level was reached at the doses of paclitaxel 110 mg/m(2), gemcitabine 1,150 mg/m(2) and LOHP 70 mg/m(2). The dose-limiting events were grade 4 neutropenia and grade 3 febrile neutropenia. Neutropenia was the most common adverse event. A median of 3 cycles per patient was administered. One complete and five partial responses were observed in patients with ovarian carcinoma, NSCLC, urothelial cancer, mesothelioma and cancer of unknown primary. No pharmacokinetic drug interactions were detected. CONCLUSIONS: The recommended doses for future phase II studies of this combination are paclitaxel 110 mg/m(2), gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m(2) and oxaliplatin 70 mg/m(2) every 2 weeks. The regimen is generally well tolerated and merits further evaluation.
BACKGROUND: Cetuximab and panitumumab are chimeric and fully human monoclonal antibodies, respectively, against epidermal growth factor receptor used in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Incidence of documented infusion reaction (IR) is more common with cetuximab (all grades [g]: 15-21%, g 3/4: 2-5%) than panitumumab (all g: 4%, g 3/4: 1%). Anecdotal reports suggest successful challenge with panitumumab following IR with cetuximab (Saif et al. in Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 63(6):1017-1022, 2009). However, safety of cetuximab after IR with panitumumab is not known. We report two patients successfully desensitized with cetuximab after IR with panitumumab. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 42-year-old female with mCRC received panitumumab as a third-line agent. She developed severe chest tightness, pain, and shortness of breath (SOB), 5 min after first panitumumab infusion. A second 70-year-old male with mCRC developed severe facial flushing, back pain, SOB, tachycardia and hypotension, 5 min after second dose of panitumumab plus irinotecan as a second-line therapy. These two patients received desensitization protocol for cetuximab after a test dose of 20 mg IV over 10 min followed by a slow infusion 10% of original rate in 0-2 h, 25% of original rate in 2-2.5 h, 50% reduced rate in 2.5-3 h, and then 100% infusion rate after 3 h. Patients were observed 4 h after completion of infusion. RESULTS: First patient received a total of 12 cycles of cetuximab with stable disease, no recurrence of IR, and grade 1-2 acniform rash that first developed after third cycle. Second patient received a total of eight cycles uneventfully without IR. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of two patients with documented IR with panitumumab being desensitized successfully with cetuximab. Though anecdotal reports suggest safety of panitumumab in patients following IR with cetuximab, panitumumab can also cause severe IR. Our experience suggests that in case of limited options, such patients can be successfully challenged with cetuximab in a hospital after appropriate desensitization and premedication. Further studies focusing on desensitization and identifying hypersensitivity profile of different anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies are warranted.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of bevacizumab on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of irinotecan and its active metabolite. Exploratory analyses of the impact of variability in uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A (UGT1A) genes on irinotecan metabolism and toxicity were conducted. METHODS: This was an open-labeled, fixed-sequence study of bevacizumab with FOLFIRI (irinotecan, leucovorin, and infusional 5-fluorouracil). Pharmacokinetic assessments were conducted in cycles 1 and 3. RESULTS: Forty-five subjects were enrolled. No difference in dose-normalized AUC(0-last) for irinotecan and SN-38 between irinotecan administered alone or in combination with bevacizumab was identified. Leukopenia was associated with higher exposure to both irinotecan and SN-38. UGT1A1 polymorphisms were associated with variability in irinotecan PK. Gastrointestinal toxicity was associated with UGT1A6 genotype. No other associations between UGT1A genotypes and toxicity were detected. CONCLUSION: Bevacizumab does not affect irinotecan PK when administered concurrently. A variety of pharmacogenetic relationships may influence the pharmacokinetics of irinotecan and its toxicity.
PURPOSE: To study a commonly used Astragalus-based herbal formula previously found effective in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) on the pharmacokinetics of docetaxel in patients with NSCLC. METHODS: Patients with advanced NSCLC who progressed after prior platinum-containing chemotherapy were accrued and received docetaxel at 35 mg/m(2) for 3 weeks followed by 1 week of rest. At 4 days prior to the second dosing, Jinfukang was given orally. Pharmacokinetic studies of initial-dose docetaxel (in the absence of Jinfukang) and the third dose (in the presence of Jinfukang) were compared. RESULTS: Of the 24 patients enrolled, 21 started Jinfukang and docetaxel. Jinfukang had no significant impact on the pharmacokinetics of docetaxel. Median time to progression or withdrawal from treatment was 7 weeks. Twelve patients were removed from study for progression of disease; nine patients withdrew. CONCLUSIONS: Jinfukang did not alter the pharmacokinetics of docetaxel nor appear to affect survival in this study.
PURPOSE: Temozolomide pharmacokinetics were evaluated in children receiving concurrent O(6)-benzylguanine (O(6)BG), which enhanced the hematological toxicity of temozolomide. METHODS: Temozolomide was administered orally, daily for 5 days starting at 28 mg/m(2) per day with escalations to 40, 55, 75 and 100 mg/m(2) per day with O(6)BG intravenously daily for 5 days at doses of 60, 90 or 120 mg/m(2) per day. Plasma samples were drawn over 48 h after the day 5 dose. Temozolomide was quantified with a validated HPLC/tandem mass spectroscopic assay. RESULTS: Temozolomide was rapidly absorbed (mean T (max), 2.1 h). The mean apparent clearance (CL/F) (96 mL/min/m(2)) was similar to the CL/F for temozolomide alone and was not age- or gender-dependent. There was minimal inter-patient variability. CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced hematologic toxicity resulting from combining O(6)BG with temozolomide does not appear to be the result of a pharmacokinetic interaction between the agents.
Larotaxel (XRP9881, RPR109881), a novel semi-synthetic taxoid that shares a mode of action with the taxanes docetaxel and paclitaxel, was active in preclinical studies against a broad spectrum of tumour cells and tumour models refractory/resistant to taxanes, and have demonstrated clinical activity in taxane pre-treated/resistant metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients. The current phase I dose-escalation study sought to define in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumours the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and recommended dose (RD) of larotaxel administered as a 1-h intravenous infusion every 3 weeks. Eighteen patients were treated in total with 11 of those (61%) having previously received a docetaxel- or paclitaxel-based regimen. The MTD was defined as 90 mg/m(2) following the occurrence of dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) in two of five patients treated at this dose level including grade 4 neutropenia lasting >7 days or febrile neutropenia. The RD for phase II was consequently 75 mg/m(2) q3w, with no DLTs in the six patients treated. The principal toxicity and DLT was neutropenia, with or without neutropenic complications. Partial responses were reported for 2 of 18 (11%) treated patients and a further 8 achieved stable disease (44%). The clearance 19.1-31.9 L/h was similar to that observed in Caucasian subjects with value of 33.0 +/- 10.7 L/h. In conclusion, larotaxel 75 mg/m(2), administered as a 1-h infusion every 3 weeks, appeared to be clinically tolerable in this Japanese patient population and showed early indications of activity.
PURPOSE : To assess the feasibility of administering troxacitabine, an L-nucleoside analog that is not a substrate for deoxycytidine deaminase, in combination with cisplatin, to identify pharmacokinetic interactions, and to seek preliminary evidence of antitumor activity. METHODS: Patients with advanced solid malignancies were treated with cisplatin intravenously over an hour followed by troxacitabine intravenously over 30 min on day 1 every 28 days at the following cisplatin/troxacitabine (mg/m(2)) dose levels 50/4.8, 75/4.8, 50/6.4, 75/6.4, and 75/8.0. Plasma and urine sampling were performed to characterize the pharmacokinetic parameters of troxacitabine in combination with cisplatin. RESULTS: Thirty-one patients received 77 courses of cisplatin/troxacitabine at five dose levels. Grade 4 neutropenia lasting more than 5 days and/or grade 4 thrombocytopenia were consistently experienced by minimally pretreated (MP) and heavily pretreated (HP) patients at doses exceeding 75/6.4 and 50/4.8 mg/m(2), respectively. Mean values for the volume of distribution at steady state and clearance of troxacitabine were 196-396 L and 7.2-9.8 L/h, respectively. A patient with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer experienced a 42% reduction in extent of disease for 6 months. CONCLUSIONS: The combination of cisplatin and troxacitabine produces dose-limiting myelosuppression at lower doses of troxacitabine than single agent doses. The recommended phase II doses of cisplatin/troxacitabine are 75/6.4 and 50/4.8 mg/m(2), every 4 weeks, for MP and HP patients, respectively. The addition of cisplatin did not substantially alter the pharmacokinetic behavior of troxacitabine.
PURPOSE: We tried to clarify the cytotoxic mechanism of VK(3) using the breast cancer cell line MCF-7. METHODS: Cytotoxicity was measured via intracellular esterase activity. DNA fragmentation was assessed by agarose gel electrophoresis. JC-1 staining was applied to measure mitochondrial dysfunction. Caspase activation and reactive oxidative species (ROS) generation were also measured. RESULTS: VK(3) exhibited cytotoxicity that caused DNA fragmentation in MCF-7 cells with an IC(50) of 14.2 microM. JC-1 staining revealed that VK(3) caused mitochondrial dysfunction including a disappearance of mitochondrial membrane potential. Additional investigation showed that the mitochondrial damage was induced by the generation of ROS and the subsequent activation of caspase-7 and -9. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that VK(3)-induced apoptosis is selectively initiated by the mitochondria-related pathway and might be useful in breast cancer chemotherapy.
PURPOSE: Advanced biliary tract carcinoma (BTC) is a dismal disease with no standard chemotherapy. We investigated efficacy and toxicity of biweekly oxaliplatin with 48-h infusion of 5-FU/LV in advanced BTC. METHODS: All patients had histologic confirmation of BTC, at least one measurable site of disease, and had received no prior chemotherapy. Patients were older than 20 years with ECOG performance scores (PS) of 0-2. Treatment involved 2-h infusion of oxaliplatin (85 mg/m(2)) diluted in D5W 500 ml followed by 48-h infusion of 5-FU (3,000 mg/m(2)) and LV (100 mg/m(2)) biweekly. Response evaluation was based on RECIST criteria and was carried out every two courses of treatment; toxicity evaluation was based on NCI common toxicity criteria version 3.0. RESULTS: From August 2005 to December 2006, 34 chemotherapy-naive patients with advanced BTC were enrolled and 32 intention-to-treat patients were evaluated. Partial response was 18.8%, stable disease was 31.3%, resulting in a disease control rate of 50.0%. Median time to progression and survival was 3.7 and 7 months, respectively. The most common grade 3/4 toxicities were neutropenia 15.6% (5/32), stomatitis 9.4% (3/32), thrombocytopenia 6.3% (2/32), diarrhea 6.3% (2/32) and neuropathy 3.1% (1/32). No treatment-related deaths occurred. CONCLUSIONS: The biweekly OXA and 48-h infusion of 5-FU/LV in patients with advanced BTC showed tolerable and efficacy equivalent to other combination regimens treatment.
PURPOSE: ON 01910.Na is a novel targeted anti-cancer agent under clinical investigation in Phase I and II trials. The purpose of this research was to evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile of ON 01910.Na across several species, and to evaluate the effects of protein binding and duration of exposure on its in vitro cytotoxic activity. METHODS: Data were collated from several preclinical investigations, where the plasma disposition and tissue distribution of ON 01910.Na were assessed after administration (10-150 mg/kg, IP or IV) to several species (mouse, rat, and dog). Plasma protein binding was assessed using ultrafiltration. Cytotoxic activity of ON 01910.Na was determined in DU145 cells, and activity was correlated to unbound drug concentration and the duration of exposure. RESULTS: ON 01910.Na exhibits extensive plasma protein binding and the compound displays rapid elimination from the circulation in all three animal species (t(1/2) range 0.404-0.870 h). Tissue distribution studies in mice revealed highest drug accumulation in the liver, followed by the kidneys. ON 01910.Na is not extensively metabolized in vivo and urinary excretion is predominant at higher doses. ON 01910.Na cytotoxicity in DU145 cells was adversely affected by protein binding in the incubation medium. Drug cytotoxicity was greatly enhanced upon extending the duration of exposure at reduced drug concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: Due to the short half-life and rapid clearance of the drug, administration of ON 01910.Na by continuous IV infusion is a likely treatment option for cancer patients.
PURPOSE: S-1 is a fourth-generation oral fluoropyrimidine that was developed to mimic the effects achieved with protracted continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). This phase II study evaluated the efficacy and safety of S-1 salvage chemotherapy in patients with paclitaxel- and cisplatin-refractory gastric cancer. The primary end point was progression-free survival; secondary end points were overall survival, safety, and clinical benefit. METHODS: Patients were eligible for the study if they had histologically documented gastric adenocarcinoma previously treated with paclitaxel and cisplatin, age > or = 18 years, Eastern Clinical Oncology Group performance status < or =2, adequate organ function, and no evidence of gastrointestinal obstruction or passage disturbance. Patients were treated with a dose of S-1 based on body surface area (BSA) as follows: BSA < 1.25 m(2), 80 mg/day; 1.25 < or = BSA < 1.5 m(2), 100 mg/day; BSA > or= 1.5 m(2), 120 mg/day. The total dose was divided in two and administered twice daily for 4 weeks followed by a 2-week rest period. RESULTS: Of the 53 patients enrolled in this study, 49 were evaluable. A total of 190 chemotherapy cycles were administered, and the median number of cycles was 2. Five patients (9.4%) had a partial response, and 18 (34%) had stable disease. Median progression-free survival and overall survival were 4.9 and 10.4 months, respectively. Grade 3/4 hematological toxicities included neutropenia in six patients (11%) but no cases of febrile neutropenia were found. Most of the non-hematological toxicities were diarrhea, asthenia, and mucositis, but none reached grade 3 or grade 4 in severity. Improvement of pain was observed in 17 patients (32.1%). CONCLUSIONS: S-1 monotherapy provides active and safe salvage chemotherapy for patients with advanced gastric cancer who have been previously treated with paclitaxel and cisplatin.
PURPOSE: To report a single case of uridine glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) polymorphism and hyperbilirubinemia in a patient who received sorafenib. METHODS: A 63-year-old man with cirrhosis was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma. His cirrhosis was categorized as Child-Pugh A, total bilirubin concentration was 24 micromol/L (normal range <20 micromol/L). The patient was enrolled in a phase I trial combination study of cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin combined with sorafenib. RESULTS: After a single infusion of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide and 7 days of sorafenib, he presented with an elevated bilirubin concentration (48 micromol/L). Unconjugated bilirubin was 38 micromol/L and conjugated was 10 micromol/L. The patient was found to have one mutant allele (UGT1A1*28). CONCLUSIONS: The isolated increase in serum bilirubin levels in our patient was probably due to sorafenib-induced UGT1A1 inhibition that manifested itself due both to the patient having one UGT1A1*28 allele and the presence of underlying liver disease. Bilirubin elevations in patients treated with sorafenib could indicate progression or drug toxicity; hence, these possibilities need to be ruled out. We would suggest that when patients develop hyperbilirubinemia while taking sorafenib for any indication, consideration be given to obtaining a fractionation of bilirubin and consideration of UGT1A1 genotyping in order to exclude a Gilbert's syndrome as possible reason for the hyperbilrubinemia. Further studies are warranted to analyze the impact of sorafenib treatment on unconjugated bilirubin blood levels in patients with Gilbert's syndrome.
PURPOSE: PG11047 is a polyamine analog currently in Phase I trials for advanced cancer as a monotherapy and in combination with a number of approved anti-cancer agents. The use of polyamines as a target for antiproliferative therapy is based on findings that cells synthesize polyamines excessively when induced to grow and that polyamine metabolism is frequently dysregulated in cancer. A selective polyamine transport system provides access for PG11047 into rapidly dividing cells to inhibit polyamine biosynthetic enzymes, to induce the polyamine catabolic enzymes spermidine/spermine N(1)-acetyltransferase (SSAT) and spermine oxidase (SMO) which could subsequently induce reactive oxygen species that contribute to tumor cell responses to PG11047, and to function as a polyamine with altered function when it binds to natural polyamine binding sites. The objective of the present study was to assess the antitumor effects of PG11047 alone and in combination with approved anti-cancer agents. METHODS: The antitumor efficacy of PG11047 as a single agent, and in combination with cisplatin and bevacizumab, was tested in models of lung (A549) and prostate (DU-145) cancer, respectively. RESULTS: PG11047 significantly inhibited tumor development in both lung and prostate cancer models when administered as a single agent. In the lung cancer model, PG11047 potentiated the antitumor effect of cisplatin. Although potent activity was observed with PG11047 and bevacizumab when administered as single agents in the prostate cancer model, the combination arm significantly enhanced antitumor activity compared with either agent alone. In all experiments, PG11047 was well tolerated with no adverse effects on bodyweight gain. CONCLUSIONS: The preclinical data support the rationale for the current Phase I trials which are assessing PG11047 as a monotherapy and in combination with a number of approved anti-cancer agents including cisplatin and bevacizumab.
BACKGROUND: The presence of hepatic portal venous gas (HPVG) is a rare finding. It is most commonly caused by bowel necrosis and typically carries a grave prognosis. Bevacizumab has emerged as an effective standard therapy in the frontline management of advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although bevacizumab is associated with gastrointestinal perforation, it has not been shown to cause HPVG. CASE: A 75-year-old man, diagnosed with metastatic NSCLC, was treated with palliative chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and bevacizumab for six cycles. He continued on maintenance bevacizumab after that for a total of six doses, given every 3 weeks, with continued stable disease. During a surveillance CT scan 4 weeks after the last dose of bevacizumab, HPVG was shown. CONCLUSION: This is the first case of HPVG associated with bevacizumab therapy in a patient with metastatic NSCLC. The HPVG may have been an early warning sign of impending bowel perforation, and bevacizumab was immediately discontinued, with HPVG completely resolving on follow-up CT scan 2 weeks later. We recommend that bevacizumab therapy be immediately and permanently discontinued whenever HPVG is observed, as this may help avoid a potentially catastrophic outcome.
There exist many recurrent neural networks for solving optimization-related problems. In this paper, we present a method for deriving such networks from existing ones by changing connections between computing blocks. Although the dynamic systems may become much different, some distinguished properties may be retained. One example is discussed to solve variational inequalities and related optimization problems with mixed linear and nonlinear constraints. A new network is obtained from two classical models by this means, and its performance is comparable to its predecessors. Thus, an alternative choice for circuits implementation is offered to accomplish such computing tasks.
This correspondence presents servo and nonlinear model following controls for a class of nonlinear systems using the Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy model-based control approach. First, the construction method of the augmented fuzzy system for continuous-time nonlinear systems is proposed by differentiating the original nonlinear system. Second, the dynamic fuzzy servo controller and the dynamic fuzzy model following controller, which can make outputs of the nonlinear system converge to target points and to outputs of the reference system, respectively, are introduced. Finally, the servo and model following controller design conditions are given in terms of linear matrix inequalities. Design examples illustrate the utility of this approach.
In this paper, the packet-based control approach to networked control systems (NCSs) is extended to the continuous-time case with the use of a discretization technique for continuous network-induced delay. The derived approach can effectively simultaneously deal with network-induced delay, data packet dropout, and data packet disorder and leads to a novel model for NCSs. This model offers the designer the freedom of designing different controllers with respect to specific network conditions, which is distinct from previous results and ensues better system performance. By applying switched system theory, the stability criterion for the derived model is obtained, which is then used to obtain an linear matrix inequality-based stabilized controller design method for the packet-based control approach. A numerical example is also presented, which illustrates the effectiveness of the proposed packet-based control approach by comparison.
PURPOSE: Squamous cell anal carcinoma (SCC) is an uncommon disease comprising only 1-5% of all intestinal tumours. SCC is now considered the prototype for the successful application of conservative treatment as chemoradiation instead of aggressive surgery. The EGFR status and k-ras mutations in SCC of the anal canal has not been well investigated. The purpose of our evaluation was to give information about this issue. METHODS: From June 1999 to December 2008, 32 patients affected by SCC were treated in our institution with chemotherapy containing Fluoropyrimidine and platinum salt concomitant with pelvic radiotherapy. Immunohistochemistry for EGFR and k-ras mutation was retrospectively evaluated. RESULTS: Twenty-six specimens were considered evaluable for biological objectives: K-ras mutation was performed in all cases, while EGFR in 12. In all cases of our series wild-type K-ras was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Such information is, in our knowledge, the Wrst reported in literature on this setting. This observation previously reported in other tumours has supported the effective use of EGFR-inhibitors in recurrent or metastatic disease. This observation could support the role of EGFR-inhibitors in the treatment of SCC.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are essential for efficient and proper execution of a large number of cellular processes including signalling induced by exogenous factors. However, ROS are highly reactive in nature and excessive or prolonged ROS formation can result in considerable damage to cellular constituents and is implicated in the onset of a large variety of diseases as well as in the process of ageing [reviewed in [1] T.M. Paravicini, R.M. Touyz, Redox signaling in hypertension, Cardiovasc. Res. 71 (2006) 247-258, [2] P. Chiarugi, From anchorage dependent proliferation to survival: lessons from redox signalling, IUBMB life 60 (2008) 301-307, [3] M. Valko, D. Leibfritz, J. Moncol, M.T. Cronin, M. Mazur, J. Telser, Free radicals and antioxidants in normal physiological functions and human disease, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 39 (2007) 44-84]. Management of ROS to prevent potential damage, yet enabling its signalling function is achieved through numerous enzyme systems e.g. peroxidases, superoxide dismutases etc. and small molecules e.g. glutathione that collectively form the cellular anti-oxidant system. The O-class of Forkhead box (FOXO) transcription factors regulates amongst others cellular resistance against oxidative stress [[4] Y. Honda, S. Honda, The daf-2 gene network for longevity regulates oxidative stress resistance and Mn-superoxide dismutase gene expression in Caenorhabditis elegans, Faseb J. 13 (1999) 1385-1393]. In turn FOXOs themselves are regulated by ROS and cellular oxidative stress results in the activation of FOXOs [[5] M.A. Essers, S. Weijzen, A.M. de Vries-Smits, I. Saarloos, N.D. de Ruiter, J.L. Bos, B.M. Burgering, FOXO transcription factor activation by oxidative stress mediated by the small GTPase Ral and JNK, EMBO J. 23 (2004) 4802-4812]. A prominent feature of ROS-induced FOXO activation is ROS-induced binding of beta-catenin to FOXO [[6] M.A. Essers, L.M. de Vries-Smits, N. Barker, P.E. Polderman, B.M. Burgering, H.C. Korswagen, Functional interaction between beta-catenin and FOXO in oxidative stress signaling, Science (New York, NY) 308 (2005) 1181-1184, [7] M. Almeida, L. Han, M. Martin-Millan, C.A. O'Brien, S.C. Manolagas, Oxidative stress antagonizes Wnt signaling in osteoblast precursors by diverting beta-catenin from T cell factor- to forkhead box O-mediated transcription, J. Biol. Chem. 282 (2007) 27298-27305, [8] D. Hoogeboom, M.A. Essers, P.E. Polderman, E. Voets, L.M. Smits, B.M. Burgering, Interaction of FOXO with beta-catenin inhibits beta-catenin/T cell factor activity, J. Biol. Chem. 283 (2008) 9224-9230]. However, ROS affect many transcriptional programs besides that of FOXOs. Here, we discuss the recent progress in our understanding as to how ROS may regulate the interplay between some of the ROS-sensitive transcription factors through diverting beta-catenin binding to these transcription factors. We propose that beta-catenin acts as a key switch between the various ROS-sensitive transcription programs.
Impairment of oxygen supply occurs in many pathological situations. In the case of cancer, both chronic and acute hypoxic areas are found in the tumor. Tumor hypoxia is associated with poor clinical prognoses and is correlated with tumor growth and metastasis development. Pyruvate is a common metabolite, as it is an end-product of glycolysis and an energy substrate for the mitochondrial Krebs cycle. It is also well known for its protective properties against stressful conditions, particularly hypoxia. Its presence determines cellular fate when there is a lack of oxygen. Interestingly, pyruvate metabolism is altered during cancer development. For years, this was assumed to be a consequence of malignant transformation. However, it now is becoming clear that pyruvate could contribute to cancer progression. The role of pyruvate during hypoxia has been widely studied in non-tumor tissues and cells; it is less documented whether or not the protective effect of pyruvate could also take place in cancer cells. If so, pyruvate might be deleterious for cancer patients. The present paper reviews data that highlight the role of pyruvate in cancer cells and tumors during hypoxic stress.
The elucidation of the human and mouse genome sequence and developments in high-throughput genome analysis, and in computational tools, have made it possible to profile entire cancer genomes. In parallel with these advances mouse models of cancer have evolved into a powerful tool for cancer gene discovery. Here we discuss the approaches that may be used for cancer gene identification in both human and mouse and discuss how a cross-species 'oncogenomics' approach to cancer gene discovery represents a powerful strategy for finding genes that drive tumourigenesis.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key step during embryogenesis. Accumulating evidence suggests a critical role in cancer progression, through which tissue epithelial cancers invade and metastasise. Cell characteristics are highly affected during EMT, resulting in altered cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, cell motility and invasiveness. Nevertheless, the demonstration of this process in human cancer has been proven difficult and controversial. Besides the fact that the acquisition of mesenchymal characteristics is not a prerequisite for cell migration/invasion, it is a transient event that concerns only few cells in a tumour mass. The induction of EMT depends on the tumour type and its genetic alterations as well as on its interaction with the extracellular matrix. In parallel, trials for EMT identification in clinical samples lack of a widely accepted methodology, nomenclature and reliable markers. This review summarizes the main EMT characteristics and proposes methodologies for better analysis in vitro. It also highlights recent studies identifying cells with EMT characteristics in human cancer and proposes certain markers to identify them in tumour samples. Finally, it cites the recent literature concerning the mechanisms of drug resistance related to EMT in the context of anti-tumour therapies and proposes related new targets for therapy.
Malignant tumor cells display uncontrolled proliferation, loss of epithelial cell polarity, altered interactions with neighboring cells and the surrounding extracellular matrix, and enhanced migratory properties. Proteins of the Rho GTPase family regulate all these processes in cell culture and, for that reason, Rho GTPases, their regulators, and their effectors have been suggested to control tumor formation and progression in humans. However, while the tumor-relevant functions of Rho GTPases are very well documented in vitro, we are only now beginning to assess their contribution to cancer in human patients and in animal models. This review will give a very brief overview of Rho GTPase function in general and then focus on in vivo evidence for a role of Rho GTPases in malignant tumors, both in human patients and in genetically modified mice.
The Ras-Association Domain Family (RASSF) comprises ten members, termed RASSF1 to RASSF10. RASSF1 to RASSF6 harbor a C-terminal Ras-association (RA) domain and RASSF7 to RASSF10 contain an N-terminal RA domain. Interestingly, it was observed that in various tumor types distinct RASSFs transcripts (e.g. RASSF1A and RASSF2A) are missing due to hypermethylation of their CpG island promoter. Since methylation of the RASSF1A promoter is described as an early and frequent event in tumorigenesis, RASSF1A could serve as a useful diagnostic marker in cancer screens. RASSFs are implicated in various cellular mechanisms including apoptosis, cell cycle control and microtubule stabilization, though little is known about the underlying mechanisms. Tumor suppressing functions were reported for several members. Here we review the current literature on RASSF members focusing on structural, functional and epigenetic aspects. Characterizing the cellular mechanisms that regulate the signaling pathways RASSFs are involved in, could lead to a deeper understanding of tumor development and, furthermore, to new strategies in cancer treatment.
Genomic translocations leading to the expression of chimeric transcripts characterize several hematologic, mesenchymal and epithelial malignancies. While several gene fusions have been linked to essential molecular events in hematologic malignancies, the identification and characterization of recurrent chimeric transcripts in epithelial cancers has been limited. However, the recent discovery of the recurrent gene fusions in prostate cancer has sparked a revitalization of the quest to identify novel rearrangements in epithelial malignancies. Here, the molecular mechanisms of gene fusions that drive several epithelial cancers and the recent technological advances that increase the speed and reliability of recurrent gene fusion discovery are explored.
Biomarkers are molecular indicators of a biological status, and as biochemical species can be assayed to evaluate the presence of cancer and therapeutic interventions. Through a variety of mechanisms cancer cells provide the biomarker material for their own detection. Biomarkers may be detectable in the blood, other body fluids, or tissues. The expectation is that the level of an informative biomarker is related to the specific type of disease present in the body. Biomarkers have potential both as diagnostic indicators and monitors of the effectiveness of clinical interventions. Biomarkers are also able to stratify cancer patients to the most appropriate treatment. Effective biomarkers for the early detection of cancer should provide a patient with a better outcome which in turn will translate into more efficient delivery of healthcare. Technologies for the early detection of cancer have resulted in reductions in disease-associated mortalities from cancers that are otherwise deadly if allowed to progress. Such screening technologies have proven that early detection will decrease the morbidity and mortality from cancer. An emerging theme in biomarker research is the expectation that panels of biomarker analytes rather than single markers will be needed to have sufficient sensitivity and specificity for the presymptomatic detection of cancer. Biomarkers may provide prognostic information of disease enabling interventions using targeted therapeutic agents as well as course-corrections in cancer treatment. Novel genomic, proteomic and metabolomic technologies are being used to discover and validate tumor biomarkers individually and in panels.
Ribonucleases (RNases) are a group of enzymes that cleave RNAs at phosphodiester bonds resulting in remarkably diverse biological consequences. This review focuses on mammalian RNases that are capable of, or potentially capable of, cleaving messenger RNA (mRNA) as well as other RNAs in cells and play roles in the development of human cancers. The aims of this review are to provide an overview of the roles of currently known mammalian RNases, and the evidence that associate them as regulators of tumor development. The roles of these RNases as oncoproteins and/or tumor suppressors in influencing cell growth, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and other cellular hallmarks of cancer will be presented and discussed. The RNases under discussion include RNases from the conventional mRNA decay pathways, RNases that are activated under cellular stress, RNases from the miRNA pathway, and RNases with multifunctional activity.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-beta/delta (PPARbeta/delta) has many beneficial physiological functions ranging from enhancing fatty acid catabolism, improving insulin sensitivity, inhibiting inflammation and increasing oxidative myofibers allowing for improved athletic performance. Thus, given the potential for targeting PPARbeta/delta for the prevention and/or treatment of diseases including diabetes, dyslipidemias, metabolic syndrome and cancer, it is critical to clarify the functional role of PPARbeta/delta in cell proliferation and associated disorders such as cancer. However, there is considerable controversy whether PPARbeta/delta stimulates or inhibits cell proliferation. This review summarizes the literature describing the influence of PPARbeta/delta on cell proliferation, with an emphasis toward dissecting the data that give rise to opposing hypotheses. Suggestions are offered to standardize measurements associated with these studies so that interlaboratory comparisons can be accurately assessed.
In order to understand how a cancer cell is functionally different from a normal cell it is necessary to assess the complex network of pathways involving gene regulation, signaling, and cell metabolism, and the alterations in its dynamics caused by the several different types of mutations leading to malignancy. Since the network is typically complex, with multiple connections between pathways and important feedback loops, it is crucial to represent it in the form of a computational model that can be used for a rigorous analysis. This is the approach of systems biology, made possible by new -omics data generation technologies. The goal of this review is to illustrate this approach and its utility for our understanding of cancer. After a discussion of recent progress using a network-centric approach, three case studies related to diagnostics, therapy, and drug development are presented in detail. They focus on breast cancer, B-cell lymphomas, and colorectal cancer. The discussion is centered on key mathematical and computational tools common to a systems biology approach.
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a type of aggressive breast cancer lacking the expression of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2). TNBC patients account for approximately 15% of total breast cancer patients and are more prevalent among young African, African-American and Latino women patients. The currently available ER-targeted and Her-2-based therapies are not effective for treating TNBC. Recent studies have revealed a number of novel features of TNBC. In the present work, we comprehensively addressed these features and discussed potential therapeutic approaches based on these features for TNBC, with particular focus on: 1) the pathological features of TNBC/basal-like breast cancer; 2) E(2)/ERbeta-mediated signaling pathways; 3) G-protein coupling receptor-30/epithelial growth factor receptor (GPCR-30/EGFR) signaling pathway; 4) interactions of ERbeta with breast cancer 1/2 (BRCA1/2); 5) chemokine CXCL8 and related chemokines; 6) altered microRNA signatures and suppression of ERalpha expression/ERalpha-signaling by micro-RNAs; 7) altered expression of several pro-oncongenic and tumor suppressor proteins; and 8) genotoxic effects caused by oxidative estrogen metabolites. Gaining better insights into these molecular pathways in TNBC may lead to identification of novel biomarkers and targets for development of diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for prevention and treatment of TNBC.
Estrogens play a major role in the biology of hormone-responsive tissues but also in the normal physiology of various non-typical hormone-responsive tissues. In disease, estrogens have been associated with tumor development, in particular with tumors such as breast, endometrium, ovary and prostate. In this paper we will review the molecular mechanisms by which estrogens are involved in cancer development, with a special focus in Lynch syndrome related neoplasia. Further, we discuss the role estrogens might have on cell proliferation and apoptosis, how estrogens metabolites can induce DNA damage and we discuss a possible connection between estrogens and changes in DNA (hypo- and hyper) methylation. In this review we will also address the protective effect that high levels of estrogens have in MMR related neoplasias.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Despite tremendous efforts to diagnose and institute new treatment regimens, the prognosis is still extremely poor. Therefore, knowledge of the molecular mechanisms governing the initiation, maintenance and progression of HCC is urgently needed. Recently, several groups have attributed an important role for c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1) in the pathogenesis of human HCC and its close association with the expression of HCC signature genes. In this review the various associations between JNK1 and HCC are discussed with the hope that targeting this pivotal kinase may lead to novel therapeutic approaches for this fatal disease.
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women in developed countries, affecting more than a million women per year worldwide. Over the last decades, our increasing understanding of breast cancer biology has led to the development of endocrine agents against hormone receptor-positive tumors and targeted therapeutics against HER2-expressing tumors. However, no targeted therapy is available for patients with triple-negative breast cancer, lacking expression of hormone receptors and HER2. Overlap between BRCA1-mutated breast cancers and triple-negative tumors suggests that an important part of the triple-negative tumors may respond to therapeutics targeting BRCA1-deficient cells. Here, we review the features shared between triple-negative, basal-like and BRCA1-related breast cancers. We also discuss the development of novel therapeutic strategies to target BRCA1-mutated tumors and triple-negative tumors with BRCA1-like features. Finally, we highlight the utility of mouse models for BRCA1-mutated breast cancer to optimize (combination) therapy and to understand drug resistance.
A major goal of molecular biology is to elucidate the mechanisms underlying cancer development and progression in order to achieve early detection, better diagnosis and staging and novel preventive and therapeutic strategies. We feel that an understanding of Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3)-regulated biological pathways will directly impact our knowledge of these areas of human carcinogenesis. The RUNX3 transcription factor is a downstream effector of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway, and has a critical role in the regulation of cell proliferation and cell death by apoptosis, and in angiogenesis, cell adhesion and invasion. We previously identified RUNX3 as a major gastric tumor suppressor by establishing a causal relationship between loss of function and gastric carcinogenesis. More recently, we showed that RUNX3 functions as a bona fide initiator of colonic carcinogenesis by linking the Wnt oncogenic and TGF-beta tumor suppressive pathways. Apart from gastric and colorectal cancers, a multitude of epithelial cancers exhibit inactivation of RUNX3, thereby making it a putative tumor suppressor in human neoplasia. This review highlights our current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of RUNX3 inactivation in the context of cancer development and progression.
High-energy protons and carbon ions exhibit an inverse dose profile allowing for increased energy deposition with penetration depth. Additionally, heavier ions like carbon beams have the advantage of a markedly increased biological effectiveness characterized by enhanced ionization density in the individual tracks of the heavy particles, where DNA damage becomes clustered and therefore more difficult to repair, but is restricted to the end of their range. These superior biophysical and biological profiles of particle beams over conventional radiotherapy permit more precise dose localization and make them highly attractive for treating anatomically complex and radioresistant malignant tumors but without increasing the severe side effects in the normal tissue. More than half a century since Wilson proposed their use in cancer therapy, the effects of particle beams have been extensively investigated and the biological complexity of particle beam irradiation begins to unfold itself. The goal of this review is to provide an as comprehensive and up-to-date summary as possible of the different radiobiological aspects of particle beams for effective application in cancer treatment.
During the last decades a considerable amount of research has been focused on cancer. A number of genetic and signaling defects have been identified. This has allowed the design and screening of a number of anti-tumor drugs for therapeutic use. One of the main challenges of anti-cancer therapy is to specifically target these drugs to malignant cells. Recently, tumor cell metabolism has been considered as a possible target for cancer therapy. It is widely accepted that tumors display an enhanced glycolytic activity and oxidative phosphorylation down-regulation (Warburg effect). Therefore, it seems reasonable that disruption of glycolysis might be a promising candidate for specific anti-cancer therapy. Nonetheless, the concept of aerobic glycolysis as the paradigm of tumor cell metabolism has been challenged, as some tumor cells use oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondria are of special interest in cancer cell energy metabolism, as their physiology is linked to the Warburg effect. Besides, their central role in apoptosis makes these organelles a promising "dual hit target" for selectively eliminate tumor cells. Thus, it is desirable to have an easy-to-use and reliable model in order to do the screening for energy metabolism-inhibiting drugs to be used in cancer therapy. From a metabolic point of view, the fermenting yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and tumor cells share several features. In this paper we will review these common metabolic properties and we will discuss the possibility of using S. cerevisiae as an early screening test in the research for novel anti-tumor compounds used for the inhibition of tumor cell metabolism.
Trop2 is a cell-surface glycoprotein overexpressed in a variety of late stage epithelial carcinomas with low to no expression in normal tissues. Some of the important roles that Trop2 plays in epithelial cancers have recently been revealed. Trop2 overexpression is associated with decreased patient survival as well as increased tumor aggressiveness and metastasis. Its overexpression in metastatic tissue makes it a very attractive and potential therapeutic target for late stage disease. This protein can transduce an intracellular calcium signal and contains a conserved phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) binding motif as well as a serine phosphorylation site which interacts with protein kinase C. This protein has recently being found to be expressed in cells with stem-like properties which allude to a potential role in progenitor cell biology. Further understanding of the signaling pathways involved with this molecule and its important role in metastasis will shed new light on the mechanism of Trop2 overexpression in late stage disease and could result in the development of new therapies targeting this widely overexpressed oncogene.
Metastasis, the spread of malignant cells from a primary tumor to distant sites, poses the biggest problem to cancer treatment and is the main cause of death of cancer patients. It occurs in a series of discrete steps, which have been modeled into a "metastatic cascade". In this review, we comprehensively describe the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the different steps, including Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), invasion, anoikis, angiogenesis, transport through vessels and outgrowth of secondary tumors. Furthermore, we implement recent findings that have broadened and challenged the classical view on the metastatic cascade, for example the establishment of a "premetastatic niche", the requirement of stem cell-like properties, the role of the tumor stroma and paracrine interactions of the tumor with cells in distant anatomical sites. A better understanding of the molecular processes underlying metastasis will conceivably present us with novel targets for therapeutic intervention.
A precise balance between growth promoting signals and growth inhibitory signals plays important roles in the maintenance of healthy mammalian cells. Any deregulation of this critical balance converts normal cells into abnormal or cancerous cells. Several macromolecules are being identified and characterized that are involved in the regulation of cell signaling pathways that connect to the cell cycle and thus they play roles as tumor promoters or tumor suppressors. In situ tumor formation needs active angiogenesis, a process that generates new blood vessels from existing ones either by splitting or sprouting. Several small molecule inhibitors and proteins have been identified as inhibitors of angiogenesis. One such protein, p67/MetAP2 also known as methionine aminopeptidase 2 (MetAP2), has been shown to bind covalently to fumagillin and its derivatives that have anti-angiogenic activity. In addition to fumagillin or its derivatives, several other small molecule inhibitors of p67/MetAP2 have been recently identified and some of these drugs are in phase III trials for cancer therapy. Although molecular details of actions toward tumor suppression by these drugs are largely unknown, a significant progress has been made to understand the structure-function relationship of p67/MetAP2 and its roles in the maintenance of the levels of phosphorylation of the proportional, variant-subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2 proportional, variant) and extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2). In this article, roles of p67/MetAP2 in the suppression of cancer development are also discussed.
The purpose of this research was to develop, and establish the initial psychometric properties of, the Male Body Dissatisfaction Scale (MBDS). Ninety-five male students were recruited over three phases. An item-remainder analysis was performed in phase I, convergent and discriminant validity assessed in phase II, and test-retest reliability and factor structure assessed in phase III. The MBDS achieved an alpha level of 0.93 and was inversely related to body esteem (p=0.02) and self-esteem (p=0.03), and positively related to how much participants' opinion of themselves was based on their body shape and weight (p<0.01). The MBDS was not related to measures of affect, and was able to distinguish between males endorsing, and not endorsing, elevated body shape and weight concerns (p<0.05). Finally, the MBDS displayed a test-retest reliability coefficient of 0.96 (p<0.01). Findings suggest that the MBDS may fill the need for a reliable and valid measure of body dissatisfaction that allows men to weight particular aspects of their body image according to personal importance.
European American (EA) women report greater body dissatisfaction and less dietary control than do African American (AA) women. This study investigated whether ethnic differences in dieting history contributed to differences in body dissatisfaction and dietary control, or to differential changes that may occur during weight loss and regain. Eighty-nine EA and AA women underwent dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry to measure body composition and completed questionnaires to assess body dissatisfaction and dietary control before, after, and one year following, a controlled weight-loss intervention. While EA women reported a more extensive dieting history than AA women, this difference did not contribute to ethnic differences in body dissatisfaction and perceived dietary control. During weight loss, body satisfaction improved more for AA women, and during weight regain, dietary self-efficacy worsened to a greater degree for EA women. Ethnic differences in dieting history did not contribute significantly to these differential changes. Although ethnic differences in body image and dietary control are evident prior to weight loss, and some change differentially by ethnic group during weight loss and regain, differences in dieting history do not contribute significantly to ethnic differences in body image and dietary control.
The energy density (ED; kcal/g) of foods, when manipulated in the laboratory, affects short-term energy intake. The aim of this study was to examine if, when given a choice, dietary ED (foods only) and energy intake (expressed as a percentage of subjects' estimated daily energy requirement; EER) at a self-selected, single meal differ for teens born with a different familial predisposition to obesity and as a function of their sex. Subjects (13 males, 17 females) were 12years of age and born at high risk (HR; n=15) or low risk (LR; n=15) for obesity based on maternal pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI; kg/m(2)). The buffet meal, served for lunch and consumed ad libitum, consisted of a variety of foods and beverages with a range in ED. HR subjects consumed a more energy-dense meal (foods only) than LR subjects (1.84 vs. 1.42kcal/g; P=0.02) and males consumed a more energy-dense meal than females (1.83 vs. 1.43kcal/g; P=0.03). Total energy intake, when expressed as a percentage of subjects' daily EER, did not differ between HR and LR subjects (42% vs. 33%; P=0.16). Males, compared to females, consumed ~59% more energy from foods and beverages during the meal (46 vs. 29%; P=0.008). During a single multi-item lunch meal, teens with a familial predisposition to obesity and males, independent of their obesity risk status, self-selected a more energy-dense meal. Familial risk for obesity, through either genetic or environmental pathways, may facilitate a more energy-dense diet.
A confirmatory factor analysis of the factor structure of the Distress Tolerance Scale (DTS) created by Corstorphine et al. [Corstorphine, E., Mountford, V., Tomlinson, S., Waller, G., & Meyer, C. (2007). Distress tolerance in the eating disorders. Eating Behaviors, 8, 91-97.] was conducted to assess whether the scale's purported three factors emerged in a clinical sample of patients with a DSM-IV diagnosed eating disorder. The original three-factor model was generally considered to be a poor fit for the data. Subsequent exploratory factor analysis indicated that a better fit emerged using a four-factor structure. Significant associations were observed between behavioral avoidance of positive affect and eating disorder psychopathology. Implications for use of the DTS with eating disorder patients are discussed.
The more consistently someone records their food intake the more likely they are to lose weight. We hypothesized that subjects who kept track via their preferred method would demonstrate higher adherence and therefore improved outcomes compared to those who used a non-preferred method. Participants were randomly assigned to use a paper, PDA, or Web-based diary and classified as "Preferred" if they used their preferred method and "Non-Preferred" if they did not. Days adherent to diary use were collected for 12 weeks. Weight, % body fat, waist circumference, and self-efficacy scores were measured at baseline, 6 and 12 weeks. Thirty nine participants completed the 12 week study. Fifty nine percent were male. The mean age was 35 and mean baseline BMI was 33 kg/m(2) (+/-3.5). Forty four % (n=17) used their "Preferred" diary method and 56% (n=22) did not. Participants who used their preferred diary were more adherent to recording both food intake (64.2% vs. 43.4%, p=.015) and exercise (60.6% vs. 31.2%, p=.001). Though no difference was seen between groups on weight management outcomes, these results suggest that diary preference affects adherence to diary use.
Experiential avoidance, the refusal to accept contact with unpleasant private experiences, is believed to play a role in the onset and maintenance of eating disorders. Preliminary evidence suggests that mindfulness- and acceptance-based interventions that reduce avoidance may be effective in treating disordered eating behaviors. The purpose of the current investigation was to examine whether one form of experiential avoidance (thought suppression) and the theoretically opposing construct of dispositional mindfulness are associated with bulimic symptoms. Undergraduate men (n=219) and women (n=187) completed questionnaires assessing mindful attention and awareness, chronic thought suppression, and bulimic symptoms. A series of hierarchical regression analyses revealed that thought suppression and mindfulness accounted for unique variance in bulimic symptoms among men and women after accounting for BMI. Results are discussed in terms of the role of dispositional mindfulness and thought suppression in disordered eating.
The purpose of this study was to examine possible moderators of the relation between physical activity and obesity in adolescence. Adolescents (N=168; mean age=15.20 years; 52.4% girls; 76.8% African American) were recruited from low-income primary care medical facilities in a large southern city. Measures included Body Mass Index (BMI) percentile, physical activity, shared family physical activity, and self-efficacy for healthful eating. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to investigate a) independent contributions of physical activity, shared family activity, and self-efficacy for healthful eating to the prediction of adolescent BMI percentile; b) interactions between shared and individual physical activity in the prediction of BMI percentile; c) interactions between self-efficacy for healthful eating and physical activity in the prediction of BMI percentile; and d) interactions among all three variables. Findings revealed self-efficacy for healthful eating was a significant moderator of the adolescent physical activity and BMI percentile relation. Conclusions emphasize the interactive nature among obesity risk factors.
Total energy consumption among United States adults has increased in recent decades, and energy-containing beverages are a significant contributor to this increase. Because beverages are less satiating than solid foods, consumption of energy-containing beverages may increase energy intake and lead to weight gain; trends in food and beverage consumption coinciding with increases in overweight and obesity support this possibility. The purpose of this review is to present what is known about the effect of beverage consumption on short-term (i.e., meal) energy intake, as well as longer-term effects on body weight. Specific beverages addressed include water, other energy-free beverages (diet soft drinks, coffee and tea), and energy-containing beverages (soft drinks, juices and juice drinks, milk and soy beverages, alcohol). Existing evidence, albeit limited, suggests that encouraging water consumption, and substituting water and other energy-free beverages (diet soft drinks, coffee and tea) for energy-containing beverages may facilitate weight management. Energy-containing beverages acutely increase energy intake, however long-term effects on body weight are uncertain. While there may be health benefits for some beverage categories, additional energy provided by beverages should be compensated for by reduced consumption of other foods in the diet.
Previous research suggests that heterogeneity in bulimic features can be explained in part by pathoplastic, or varying, interpersonal problems. The present study compared groups of women with bulimic features (N=110) defined by varying interpersonal problems (warm-dominant, warm-submissive, cold-submissive, or cold-dominant) with regard to comorbid psychopathology, personality characteristics, and the influences of dietary restraint and negative affectivity on bulimic psychopathology. As predicted, group differences were not explained by severity of eating-related pathology, socially desirable responding, or the interpretability of interpersonal profiles, although groups unexpectedly differed in depressive symptoms. The warm-submissive group had highest scores on adaptive personality characteristics, including, agreeableness, extraversion, and conscientiousness. As hypothesized, the influence of negative affect and dietary restraint on bulimic symptoms differed as a function of interpersonal style, perhaps suggesting that interpersonal problem heterogeneity may mark different etiological pathways for bulimic psychopathology. Finally, interpersonal problems incremented bulimic features in predicting depressive symptoms. Overall, these results highlight the added value of considering pathoplastic interpersonal problems in addition to clinical diagnoses in the assessment of eating disorders.
PURPOSE: To identify the DNA methylation biomarkers for the detection of the stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: The methylated state of p16INK4A, ESR1, HOX9, RASSF1A, DAPK1, PTEN, ABCB1, MGMT, APC and MT1G genes that have been reported frequently methylated in lung cancer was determined using methylation-specific PCR in four lung cancer cell lines, 124 cancer tissues of the stage I NSCLC and 26 non-cancerous disease tissues. RESULT: The RASSF1A (53/124, 42.74%), APC (49/123, 39.52%), ESR1 (37/124, 29.84%), ABCB1 (31/124, 24.19%, MT1G (25/124, 20.16%) and HOXC9 (17/124, 13.71%) genes were more frequently methylated in the lung tissue from the stage I NSCLC than the non-cancerous lesion patients (2/26, 7.69%, P < 0.01; 2/26, 7.69%, P < 0.01; 2/26, 7.69%, P < 0.05; 1/26, 3.85% P < 0.01; 0/26 0%, P value: <0.01; 0/26, 0%, P < 0.05, respectively). p16INK4A was methylated in 28/124 (22.56%) of cancer tissues and 2/26 (7.69%) of non-cancerous tissues (P value >0.05). No significant association between the methylated state of the genes and the smoking, age or the pathologic types (squamous carcinoma, adenoma and the mixed types) was found. However, p16INK4A methylation was more frequently detected in the male (23/80, 28.75%) than the female (5/44, 11.36%, P > 0.05) patients. MGMT was barely methylated: 1/67, 1.49%), while DAPK1 and PTEN were not at all methylated in the cancer groups. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation analysis in tissue of RASSF1A, APC, ESR1, ABCB1 and HOXC9 genes confirmed 79.8% of the existing diagnosis for the stage I NSCLC at specificity: 73.1%. The insufficiency of predicting disease onset in China, using the previously recommended targets (MGMT, DAPK1 and PTEN) in the United States reflects a potential disease disparity between these two populations. Alternatively, methylated state of this set of genes may be more specific to the late rather than the early stage of NSCLC.
OBJECTIVES: Aberrant activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is common in human cancers. Recently, we have shown that secreted frizzled-related proteins (SFRPs) are frequently methylated in cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Furthermore, reexpression of SFRP1 and SFRP2 could suppress tumor cell transformation and invasion. Here, we want to further investigate the methylation status and function of SFRPs in adenocarcinoma of uterine cervix. METHODS: The methylation status of SFRPs was assessed in 23 adenocarcinomas (AC), and 45 normal control swabs by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and bisulfite sequencing. Then, we used reexpression of SFRP5 in cervical cancer cell lines, HeLa3rd and CaSki, to study the role of SFRP5 in cervical adenocarcinoma by colony formation and invasion assays. Finally, we checked whether SFRP5 could repress the expression of Wnt/beta-catenin downstream genes by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: The frequency of SFRP genes promoter hypermethylation in adenocarcinoma of cervix samples was 52.2% (12/23), 82.6% (19/23), 65.2% (15/23), and 73.9% (17/23), for SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4, and SFRP5, respectively. The frequency of SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP4, and SFRP5 promoter methylation in adenocarcinoma was significantly higher than in normal control samples (P < 0.001). Restoration of SFRP5 suppressed colony formation and invasive ability and inhibited expression of Wnt/beta-catenin downstream genes. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that promoter hypermethylation of SFRPs is associated with cervical adenocarcinoma, which could be used for molecular screening of cervical adenocarcinoma in the future. Moreover, SFRP5 inhibits cervical tumorigenesis through interfering Wnt pathway in vitro.
BACKGROUND: Mitogen-activated protein/ERK kinase 1 (MEKK1) is a Ser/Thr protein kinase belonging to the MEKK/STE11 subgroup of the MAPKKK family and plays a key role in tumor metastasis. However, it remains unclear about its functions in pancreatic cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed MEKK1 expression in 41 surgically resection pancreatic cancer patient's samples by immunohistochemistry and determined its role in BxPC3 cells via RNAi experiment. The abilities of invasion, motility, and adhesion of BxPC3 cells were detected by transwell assay, wound healing assay and adhesion assay, respectively. Gelatinase activity of MMPs in cultured cells was examined by gelatin zymography. RESULTS: Our data showed that MEKK1 expression is positively correlated with lymphatic metastases (P < 0.01). The abilities of invasion, motility, and adhesion of BxPC3 cells were inhibited significantly (P < 0.01) when MEKK1 was depleted with a specific siRNA. We observed that the activity of MMP2 was decreased in the MEKK1 depletion cell line (P < 0.05), accompanied with decreased phosphorylated ERK1/2. CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that the depletion of MEKK1 led to a potent inhibition on the invasion and migration of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma in vitro. It suggests that MEKK1 may be a potential target for development of anti-invasion and metastasis drugs.
PURPOSE: Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase (TK) mutations are highly predictive of response to EGFR TK inhibitors in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), a prognostic value of EGFR mutations in resected NSCLC has not been established. METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 117 patients with primary lung adenocarcinoma who underwent surgical resection between 1995 and 2005. Nucleotide sequencing of the kinase domain of EGFR (exons 18-21) was performed using nested PCR amplification of individual exons. RESULTS: Forty-eight patients (41.8%) harbored exon 19 deletion or exon 21 point mutations. EGFR mutations were more frequently found in never-smoker (P = 0.04) or in smaller-sized primary tumor (P = 0.001). A presence of EGFR mutations was significantly associated with longer disease-free survival (DFS) (20.1 vs. 34.4 months in mutated EGFR; P = 0.003). In multivariate analysis of DFS, wild-type EGFR was associated with a higher risk of recurrence, with an adjusted hazard ratio of 1.42 (95% CI, 1.1-2.41, P = 0.04), as compared to mutated EGFR. However, no significant association was observed between EGFR mutations and overall survival (P = 0.39). Isolated brain metastasis as the first recurrence after resection was found more frequently in those patients with tumors bearing EGFR mutations, although the difference was not statistically significant (9 vs. 24% in mutated EGFR, P = 0.15). CONCLUSIONS: Activating mutations within the EGFR TK domain can be used to predict the risk of recurrence in curatively resected pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
PURPOSE: 'Praneem', a polyherbal formulation developed by us, has successfully completed Phase II efficacy study for treatment of abnormal vaginal discharge due to reproductive tract infections that act as co-factors for HPV persistence. In the present study we evaluated potential anti-HPV activity of Praneem in women infected with high risk HPV type 16. METHODS: Twenty women molecularly diagnosed positive for HPV16 infection without or with low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) or inflammation were assigned to receive intra-vaginal, topical application of either Praneem tablet or placebo for 30 days excluding the days of menstrual period and were evaluated for persistence of HPV infection using HPV L1 consensus and HPV type 16-specific PCR as primary outcome. RESULTS: One course of Praneem treatment resulted in elimination of HPV in 6 out of 10 (60%) cases. A repeat treatment of four patients with persisting HPV infection resulted in clearance of HPV in two additional cases resulting in an overall 80% clearance of HPV 16 as against a spontaneous clearance of 10% (1/10) seen in the placebo arm. The elimination of HPV DNA was found to be accompanied by marked improvement in clinical symptoms and cytological abnormalities of Praneem-treated patients. CONCLUSION: Our results showed for the first time that a 30-day intra-vaginal application of the Praneem can result in elimination of HPV infection from the uterine cervix.
PURPOSE: In this study, we applied laser capture microdissection and a proteomic approach to identify novel nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) biomarkers. METHODS: Proteins from pooled microdissected NPC and normal nasopharyngeal epithelial tissues (NNET) were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and differential proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Expression of the differential protein cytokeratin 18 in the above two tissues as well as 4 NPC cell lines was determined by Western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was also performed to detect the expression of cytokeratin 18 in 62 cases of primary NPC, 28 cases of NNET, and 20 cases of cervical lymph node metastases, and the correlation of its expression level with clinicopathologic features and clinical outcomes were evaluated. siRNA and in vitro cell invasion assay were used to check the correlation between the expression of cytokeratin 18 and invasive ability of NPC. RESULTS: Thirty-six differential proteins between the NPC and NNET were identified. The expression level of cytokeratin 18 in the two types of tissues was confirmed by Western blotting and related to differentiation degree and metastatic potential of the NPC cell lines. Significant cytokeratin 18 down-regulation was observed in NPC versus NNET (P = 0.000), whereas significant cytokeratin 18 up-regulation was observed in lymph node metastasis versus primary NPC (P = 0.001). In addition, cytokeratin 18 down-regulation was significantly correlated with poor histological differentiation (P = 0.000), whereas cytokeratin 18 up-regulation was significantly correlated with advanced clinical stage (P = 0.019), recurrence (P = 0.000), and regional lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001), and distant metastasis (P = 0.000). And down-regulated cytokeratin 18 expression by siRNA significantly decreased in vitro invasive ability of 5-8F cells. Furthermore, survival curves showed that patients with cytokeratin 18 up-regulation had a poor prognosis (P = 0.000). Univariate analysis (Cox's proportional hazards model) showed that WHO histologic type (P = 0.025), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.007), distant metastasis (P = 0.005), recurrence (P = 0.000), and cytokeratin 18 (P = 0.000) were significantly associated with the prognosis of NPC. Multivariate analysis confirmed that lymph node metastasis (P = 0.012), distant metastasis (P = 0.009), recurrence (P = 0.006), and cytokeratin 18 (P = 0.001) were independent prognostic indicators. CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that cytokeratin 18 is a potential biomarker for the differentiation and prognosis of NPC, and its dysregulation might play an important role in the pathogenesis of NPC.
PURPOSE: Although survival has been studied for various subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), there have been few comprehensive studies to quantify the prognosis, including all specific histologies. The effect of family history on survival in NHL has not been examined. METHODS: We used the Swedish Family-Cancer Database to estimate hazard ratios in NHL by histology and family history. RESULTS: Using diffuse centroblastic lymphoma as reference (HR 1.0), patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and hairy-cell leukemia had the best survival. Survival advantage was also noted among patients with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and different kinds of follicular lymphomas. For T-cell lymphoma, mycosis fungoides showed a favorable prognosis. As for survival by family history, a total of 98 familial cases were noted in our Database with a similar prognosis compared to sporadic cases in both parental and offspring generations. A non-significant familial concordance of either good or poor survival was noted among family members when probands' prognosis was stratified by survival time. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide quantitative prognosis data for patients with NHL according to specific histologies. Patients with a familial NHL had a similar prognosis compared to patients with sporadic disease. The data suggest familial concordance in either good or poor survival among family members.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the effectiveness of octreotide in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma participants on the basis of randomized controlled trials. METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Center Register of Controlled Trials in The Cochrane Library, PubMed, EMBASE, Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, China Journal Full-text Database, Chinese Scientific Journals Database up to June 2008 in any language. Randomized controlled trials of octreotide for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma were selected and evaluated by two investigators. Any disagreement was solved by discussion. Analyses were performed using Review Manager 4.2. RESULTS: Six randomized controlled trials totaling 352 participants were included. The median survival time was reported in four randomized controlled trials. The results between the octreotide group and the control group (the placebo or best supportive care group) were as follows: 13.0 versus 4.0 months, 1.93 versus 1.97 months, 4.7 versus 5.3 months, and 7.0 versus 2.5 months. Three randomized controlled trials reported 6-month survival rates and 12-month survival rates and meta-analysis results in these two outcomes [(RR 1.35, 95% CI 0.92-1.97); (RR 1.35, 95% CI 0.66-11.16) respectively] were not found to be statistically significant by random-effects model. When we analyzed 6-month survival rates by fixed-effect model (RR 1.30, 95% CI 1.02-1.66), meta-analysis result reached statistical significance. CONCLUSIONS: As for the limitations of the included trials, the result may not demonstrate a significant superiority of octreotide administration in participants with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma from the available evidence.
PURPOSE: Calcium ions are highly versatile spacial and temporal intracellular signals of non-excitable cells and have an important impact on nearly every aspect of cellular life controlling cell growth, metabolism, fluid secretion, information processing, transcription, apoptosis, and motility. Neurons and glia respond to stimuli, including neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, and hormones, which increase the intracellular calcium concentration. The function of intracellular calcium in gliomas is unknown. Lots of daily used drugs may act via receptors that can be linked to the intracellular calcium system and therefore could influence glioma biology. METHODS: Glioma cells were loaded with the calcium ion sensitive dye Fura 2-AM. Subsequently, cells were stimulated with 25 different medical drugs for 30 s. The increase of free intracellular calcium ions was measured and calculated by a microscope-camera-computer-unit. RESULTS: Except for the buffer solution HEPES that served as negative control and for the cortisol derivative dexamethasone, all other 24 tested drugs induced a rise of intracellular calcium ions. The cellular calcium responses were classified into seven functional groups. The tested substances activated several types of calcium channels and receptors. CONCLUSIONS: Our study impressively demonstrates that medical drugs are potent inducers of intracellular calcium signals. Totally unexpected, the results show a high amount of functional cellular receptors and channels on glioma cells, which could be responsible for certain biological effects like migration and cell growth. This calcium imaging study proves the usability of the calcium imaging as a screening system for functional receptors on human glioma cells.
OBJECTIVES: Overweight/obesity is known to increase the risk of developing renal cell carcinoma (RCC). However, data on the prognostic impact of overweight in RCC is still conflicting. We assessed whether different body mass index (BMI) levels at the time of surgery had an effect on the long-term prognosis of RCC patients. METHODS: We evaluated 771 patients, with complete information about their BMI, who had undergone renal surgery for RCC between 1990 and 2005 at the authors' institution; the mean follow-up was 5.48 years. RESULTS: Underweight, normal weight, pre-obesity, and obesity were diagnosed in 4 (0.5%), 239 (31%), 356 (46.2%), and 172 (22.3%) RCC patients, respectively. Overweight (BMI >25) was significantly associated with younger age (P = 0.004) and positive nodal status (P = 0.04) but not with tumor stage, grade, visceral metastasis, gender, histological subtype, or tumor-related symptoms. Overweight patients had a significantly lower risk of cancer-related death; their median 5-year tumor-specific survival rate was 80% as opposed to 72% for patients with a BMI below 25 (P = 0.003). Interestingly, subgroup analysis revealed that the positive association between overweight and survival was even more pronounced in organ-confined (P < 0.001) RCC, but no correlation was observed in advanced disease (P = 0.23). CONCLUSION: We were able to identify overweight as an independent prognostic marker of improved tumor-specific survival in patients with organ-confined RCC. Basic research is required to resolve the dilemma of why, if a higher BMI predisposes to RCC, it concurrently prolongs survival after patients have undergone (partial) nephrectomy.
PURPOSE: p53 gene plays a crucial role in the response to therapy. Since it is inactivated in the majority of human cancers, it is strongly believed that the p53 mutations confer resistance to therapeutics. In this paper we analyzed the influence of two mechanistically diverse antitumor agents--cisplatin and methotrexate on the proliferation and cell cycle of two head and neck squamous cancer cell lines HEp-2 (wild type p53 gene, but HPV 18/E6-inactivated protein) and CAL 27 (mutated p53 gene), along with the influence of adenovirally mediated p53 overexpression in modulation of cisplatin and methoterexate effects, whereby subtoxic vector/compound concentrations were employed. METHODS: p53 gene was introduced into tumor cells using adenoviral vector (AdCMV-p53). The cell cycle perturbations were measured by two parameter flow cytometry. The expression of p53, p21(WAF1/CIP1) and cyclin B1 proteins was examined using immunocytochemistry and western blot methods. RESULTS: In CAL 27 cells overexpression of p53 completely abrogated high S phase content observed in methotrexate-treated cells into a G1 and slight G2 arrest, while it sustained G2 arrest of the cells treated with cisplatin, along with the reduction of DNA synthesis and cyclin B1 expression. On the other hand, in HEp-2 cell line p53 overexpression slightly slowed down the progression through S phase in cells treated with methotrexate, decreased the cyclin B1 expression only after 24 h, and failed to sustain the G2 arrest after treatment with cisplatin alone. Instead, it increased the population of S phase cells that were not actively synthesizing DNA, sustained cyclin B1 expression and allowed the G2 cells to progress through mitosis. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that adenovirally mediated p53 overexpression at sub-cytotoxic levels enhanced the activity of low doses of cisplatin and methotrexate in HEp-2 and CAL 27 cells through changes in the cell cycle. However, the mechanisms of these effects differ depending on the genetic context and on the chemotherapeutics' modality of action.
PURPOSE: Stat6 signaling is active in cancer cells and IL-4-induced Stat6 activities or Stat6 activational phenotypes vary among cancer cells. This study aimed at investigating possible mechanism(s) involved in the formation of varying Stat6 activities/phenotypes. METHODS: Stat6 regulatory genes, SOCS-1 and SHP-1, were examined for mRNA expression using RT-PCR, and their promoter DNA methylation was assayed by methylation-specific PCR in Stat6-phenotyped colon cancer cell lines. DNA methylation was then verified by sequencing. RT-PCR assay and Western blotting were used to detect the expression of SOCS-1 and SHP-1 after demethylation using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. RESULTS: Compared with Stat6(null) Caco-2 cells, Stat6(high) HT-29 cells showed decreased constitutive expression of SOCS-1 and SHP-1, which correlated with DNA hypermethylation in these genes' promoters. Interestingly, demethylation in HT-29 cells recovered the constitutive expression of SOCS-1 and SHP-1. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that DNA methylation controls the constitutive expression of negative Stat6 regulatory genes, which may affect Stat6 activities.
BACKGROUND: The purpose of this retrospective study was to test whether the pretreatment hematologic profile can predict the prognosis of patients with head and neck cancer. METHODS: Medical records from 278 patients with head and neck cancer were reviewed, and 270 cases were evaluable. Clinical data including age, gender, stage, pretreatment hematologic profile (including white blood cell, platelet, and differential counts, and hemoglobin level) were recorded. Statistical analyses were performed to determine the prognostic effect of these hematologic indicators, as well as clinical variables. The association between the hematologic indicators and clinical factors was also analyzed. RESULTS: Pretreatment monocytes >1,000 cells/microl (P = 0.028), hemoglobin <11.0 g/dl (P = 0.022), and platelet count >400 x 10(3) cells/microl (P = 0.017) were identified as independent prognostic factors in addition to the nodal status and metastasis. A significant correlation between T-stage/monocyte or platelet count and metastasis/platelet count were shown. Monocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytosis were demonstrated to have a cumulative effect on the prognosis of head and neck cancer patients (normal vs. abnormality in one lineage, P = 0.001; abnormality in one vs. more than one lineage, P = 0.005). CONCLUSIONS: A pretreatment hematologic profile can be considered as a useful prognostic marker in patients with head and neck cancer.
PURPOSE: An altered expression of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) has been found in malignant melanoma cells. We performed an association study to investigate the effect of putative functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of BMP4 on development of cutaneous melanoma (CM). METHODS: We selected the predicted functional SNPs 6007 C/T (rs17563) and -3445 T/G (rs4898820) by the combination of three computational tools (FASTSNP, F-SNP and SNP Function Portal) plus another tool (SNP@promoter) skilled in identifying SNPs in transcription regulatory regions. Both SNPs were genotyped in a case-control study of 215 individuals with CM and 342 controls. We also evaluated the BMP4 hypothetical mRNA secondary structure by GeneBee program, the BMP4 mRNA levels and protein concentrations according to the genotype of two selected SNPs in transformed B-cells of 80 controls and in plasma samples of 38 controls, respectively. RESULTS: The BMP4 T-allele was associated with CM (OR: 1.39, 95% CI: 1.09-1.78, P = 0.007). The T-allele was predicted to change mRNA structure and the BMP4 mRNA levels were significantly higher in T-allele carriers compared with C-allele carriers (P = 0.01), even the BMP4 protein plasma levels were higher among T-allele carries, but without reaching the statistical significance. No significant association was found between the SNP -3445 T/G alleles and either the risk of CM, or the mRNA levels of BMP4. CONCLUSIONS: This study evidences the relevance of using bioinformatics tools in searching for cancer-associated gene polymorphisms and suggests that the predicted functional SNP 6007 C/T affects BMP4 gene expression and the risk to development of CM.
PURPOSE: A 11-gene set by methylation-specific PCR in urine sediments for sensitive/specific detection of bladder cancer has been identified previously. In this study, we have evaluated 10 DNA methylation biomarkers that have been reported informative in western countries for bladder cancer diagnosis for a better set. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The promoter CpG Islands of the following 10 genes: CDH1, FANCF, LOXL1, LOXL4, p16INK4, SFRP1, SOX9, TIG1, TIMP3, and XAF1 have been subjected to methylation-specific PCR analysis in the DNA of 2 bladder cancer cell lines, 2 normal bladder tissues and urine sediments of 82 bladder cancer patients, 15 non-cancerous urogenital patients and 5 healthy volunteers. RESULTS: Both XAF1 and LOXL1 genes were heterozygously methylated in the normal bladder tissues, showing no cancer state specificity. While the hypermethylated states were detected in urine sediments of bladder cancer at a frequency not less than 2.4% (2/82 cases), nine genes were also methylated in the patients of the non-cancerous urogenital diseases. The methylated SFRP1 was detected in 36.6% (30/82 cases) of bladder cancer and 6.7% (1/15 cases) of non-cancerous urogenital diseases, showing the bladder cancer specificity. CONCLUSIONS: Inclusion of the SFRP1 gene into a set of 11 genes has improved the bladder cancer detection. The insufficiency of predicting disease onset in this study with the previously recommended targets in western countries suggests a possible disease disparity between these two populations. Alternatively, the tissue-specific methylation might be mistaken as the cancer specific in the studies where no non-cancerous lesion controls were involved.
PURPOSE: In this study, we investigated the correlation between p53 and bcl-2 in gambogic acid (GA)-induced apoptosis. METHOD: MTT assay was employed to evaluate MCF-7 cell viability after GA treatment. Cell morphological changes were observed follow-up under the inverted microscope after GA withdrawal. To observe the cell apoptosis, DAPI staining was used. Meanwhile, p53 small interfering RNA (si-RNA) was adopted to knock p53 down. All expressions of p53 and bcl-2 were evaluated by Western blot analysis. RESULTS: MTT assay showed that GA inhibited MCF-7 cell growth effectively in a time-dependent manner. With 0.5 h GA treatment, p53 was significantly increased, whereas bcl-2 was reduced potently with 6 h GA treatment. After GA withdrawal, p53 expressions were maintained in high levels. Furthermore, bcl-2 decreasing was attenuated after co-treatment with PFT alpha, a p53 transcription blocker. Same result was observed after p53 knock-down by p53 si-RNA. CONCLUSIONS: Gambogic acid induced human breast cancer cells MCF-7 apoptosis by reducing bcl-2 expression via p53.
BACKGROUND: Advanced and recurrent ovarian cancer results in extensive spread of tumor on the peritoneal surfaces of the abdomen and pelvis. We collectively review studies in the literature that report the efficacy of cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) for ovarian cancer peritoneal carcinomatosis. METHODS: An electronic search of all relevant studies published in peer-reviewed journals before May 2009 was performed on three databases. The quality of each study was independently assessed and classified according to the time point of HIPEC use in various setting of ovarian cancer from the consensus statement of the Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group. Clinical efficacy was synthesized through a narrative review with full tabulation of the results of each included study. RESULTS: Nineteen studies each of more than ten patients reporting treatment results of HIPEC of patients with both advanced and recurrent ovarian cancer were included and data were extracted. All studies were observational case series. The overall rate of severe perioperative morbidity ranged from 0 to 40% and mortality rate varied from 0 to 10%. The overall median survival following treatment with HIPEC ranged from 22 to 64 months with a median disease-free survival ranging from 10 to 57 months. In patients with optimal cytoreduction, a 5-year survival rate ranging from 12 to 66% could be achieved. CONCLUSION: Despite the heterogeneity of the studies reviewed, current evidence suggest that complete CRS and HIPEC may be a feasible option with potential benefits that are comparable with the current standard of care. A randomized trial is required to establish the role of HIPEC in ovarian cancer.
Cryptosporidium parvum is a protozoan parasite that infects a variety of mammals. The parasite has been shown to harbor a dsRNA virus (CPV) and in the present study, we have developed a CPV transient transfection system for this parasite by using green fluorescent protein (GFP) to replace the partial gene encoding region of the larger dsRNA (CPV-L) and the smaller dsRNA (CPV-S) virus. Two viral RNA-mediated transfection vectors: pCPVL-GFP and pCPVS-GFP were successfully constructed and both in vitro transcripts were electroporated into oocysts and sporozoites. Transient expression of GFP was detected in C. parvum oocysts and excysted sporozoites by fluorescence microscopy and by RT-PCR detection of GFP mRNA and antisense RNA in transfected C. parvum oocysts. Our study provides a new approach for studying gene expression and regulation in C. parvum and will hopefully lead to the construction of a stable CPV transfection system in the future.
Plasmodium falciparum bifunctional hydroxymethylpterin pyrophosphokinase-dihydropteroate synthase (pfHPPK-DHPS) is a crucial enzyme in the de novo folate biosynthesis pathway. The crystal structure is not yet available for this enzyme, however, homology model of the enzyme reported previously revealed the presence of parasite-specific insertions. Alignment of pfHPPK-DHPS with HPPK and DHPS sequences from other microorganisms reveals two insertions relative to the corresponding enzyme in other organisms, i.e. HPPK-1 and HPPK-2. The former encompasses amino acid residues 66-162, while the latter covers residues 213-311. In order to investigate the roles of the two insertions, we constructed a number of mutants in which parts of these two insertions were deleted. Characterization of the mutationally altered proteins revealed that deletions of residues 74-80 in the HPPK-1 sequence of the pfHPPK-DHPS, but not that of the monofunctional pfHPPK, decreased the HPPK activity. A longer deletion (residues 74-86) in the HPPK-1 sequence of the bifunctional pfHPPK-DHPS completely inactivated both HPPK and DHPS activities. However, deletion in the HPPK-2 sequence from residues 247-306 did not disrupt the activities of HPPK and DHPS, but the kinetic properties of the recombinant proteins were slightly changed. The importance of HPPK-1 sequence on the catalytic activities of HPPK and DHPS in the bifunctional pfHPPK-DHPS could have implications for development of inhibitors targeting the non-catalytic region of this chemotherapeutically important enzyme.
Strongyloides stercoralis and S. ratti are intestinal parasitic nematodes infecting rats and humans, respectively. Both present extraordinary life cycles comprising a free-living generation in addition to parasitic stages. In search of molecules possibly involved in parasite-host interaction, we performed mass spectrometry to identify excretory/secretory products of S. ratti. Amongst others we detected homologs of the heat shock proteins HSP10 and HSP60 (Sr-HSP10 and Sr-HSP60). HSPs are well known as chaperones involved in stress responses of cells, but recent studies suggest additional roles of small HSPs for parasite biology including immune modulation. To characterise Sr-HSP10, we cloned its full-length cDNA, analysed the genomic organisation, tested its presumptive role as an interaction partner of Sr-HSP60, studied its transcription in the parasite, and expressed the protein to test its immune responses. The cDNA contains an open reading frame of 330bp encoding a polypeptide of 110 amino acids with an approximate molecular weight of 10kDa. The Sr-HSP10 protein is highly homologous to that of the human pathogen S. stercoralis with only eight amino acid substitutions. Analysis of the genomic organisation of the Sr-HSP10 locus revealed that the gene is linked head-to-head to the gene encoding Sr-HSP60, and both share a bidirectional promoter. RT-PCR experiments indicated potential independent expression of the Sr-HSPs genes. In situ hybridisation results demonstrate Sr-HSP10 transcription in the gut area. Mammalian and yeast two-hybrid assays show dimerisation of Sr-HSP10, but no binding to recombinant Sr-HSP60. Immunisation experiments finally revealed a strong immunogenicity of Sr-HSP10 and provided evidence for a role in regulating the host-parasite interaction.
Microsporidia are protists that have been reported to cause infections in both vertebrates and invertebrates. They have emerged as human pathogens particularly in patients that are immunosuppressed and cases of gastrointestinal infection, encephalitis, keratitis, sinusitis, myositis and disseminated infection are well described in the literature. While benzimidazoles are active against many species of microsporidia, these drugs do not have significant activity against Enterocytozoon bieneusi. Fumagillin and its analogues have been demonstrated to have activity invitro and in animal models of microsporidiosis and human infections due to E. bieneusi. Fumagillin and its analogues inhibit methionine aminopeptidase type 2. Encephalitozoon cuniculi MetAP2 (EcMetAP2) was cloned and expressed as an active enzyme using a baculovirus system. The crystal structure of EcMetAP2 was determined with and without the bound inhibitors fumagillin and TNP-470. This structure classifies EcMetAP2 as a member of the MetAP2c family. The EcMetAP2 structure was used to generate a homology model of the E. bieneusi MetAP2. Comparison of microsporidian MetAP2 structures with human MetAP2 provides insights into the design of inhibitors that might exhibit specificity for microsporidian MetAP2.
Recent evidences indicate that transcription in Plasmodium may be hard-wired and rigid, deviating from the classical model of transcriptional gene regulation. Thus, it is important that other regulatory pathways be investigated as a comprehensive effort to curb the deadly malarial parasite. Research in post-translational modifications in Plasmodium is an emerging field that may provide new venues for drug discovery and potential new insights into how parasitic protozoans regulate their life cycle. Here, we discuss the recent findings of post-translational modifications in Plasmodium.
The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum expresses erythrocyte-surface directed variant antigens which are important virulence factors. Many are transcribed from multigene families and presumably their mode of expression is strictly controlled to guarantee immune evasion in the human host. In order to elucidate the dynamics of rif transcription and to investigate if rif switching is comparable to var switching we monitored rif variant gene expression in parasites with different cytoadhesive properties as well as after a number of reinvasions. We found identical transcripts in parasite lines with different adhesive phenotypes suggesting that rif genes do not have a critical role in determining the cytoadhesion specificity of infected erythrocytes. We show for the first time that rif genes may show a conserved mode of transcription, maintaining the previously dominant rif transcript in subsequent reinvasions, but also observed rapid switching at rates up to 45% per generation, much higher than for the var gene family.
Targeting the crucial step of Plasmodium transition from vertebrate host to mosquito vector is a promising approach to eliminate malaria. Uptake by the mosquito activates gametocytes within seconds, and in the case of male (micro) gametocytes leads to rapid DNA replication and the release of eight flagellated gametes. We developed a sensitive assay to monitor P. berghei microgametocyte activation based on [(3)H]hypoxanthine incorporation into DNA. Optimal pH range and xanthurenic acid concentrations for gametocyte activation were established and the kinetics of DNA replication investigated. Significance of the method was confirmed using P. berghei mutants and the assay was applied to analyse the effect of protease inhibitors, which revealed differences regarding their inhibitory action. The developed method thus appears suitable for reproducible determination of microgametocyte activation, medium-throughput drug screenings and deeper investigation of early blocks in gametogenesis and will facilitate the analysis of compounds for transmission blocking activities.
Ts8B2 is a gene which encodes for a member of the Taenia solium metacestode 8kDa antigen family. Since the Ts8B2-GST recombinant protein compares very favourably with other diagnostic antigens, and in order to study the antigenic nature and structure of this molecule, the Ts8B2 was expressed in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. The diagnostic potential of the recombinant Ts8B2 proteins was evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) using a collection of serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from patients with clinically defined neurocysticercosis (NCC), and also sera from T. solium infected pigs. Despite the predicted glycosylation of the Ts8B2-Bac recombinant protein, there was very little difference in assay sensitivity/specificity when the Ts8B2 reagent was expressed in either prokaryotic or eukaryotic systems, suggesting that peptidic Ts8B2 epitopes are immunodominant in porcine cysticercosis and human neurocysticercosis. Conveniently, production of recombinant Ts8B2 in Escherichia coli is economical and facile, making it a feasible and practical choice as a diagnostic reagent for use in endemic areas. The Ts8B2 ELISA is particularly useful for the diagnosis of active as opposed to inactive cases of NCC and conduct of the assay is also facilitated by the fact that assay sensitivity is significantly greater when serum as opposed to CSF samples are employed.
Glycerolipid biosynthesis in Leishmania initiates with the acylation of glycerol-3-phosphate by a single glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase, LmGAT, or of dihydroxyacetonephosphate by a dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase, LmDAT. We previously reported that acylation of the precursor dihydroxyacetonephosphate rather than glycerol-3-phosphate is the physiologically relevant pathway for Leishmania parasites. We demonstrated that LmDAT is important for normal growth, survival during the stationary phase, and for virulence. Here, we assessed the role of LmDAT in glycerolipid metabolism and metacyclogenesis. LmDAT was found to be implicated in the biosynthesis of ether glycerolipids, including the ether lipid derived virulence factor lipophosphoglycan and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins. The null mutant produced longer lipophosphoglycan molecules that were not released in the medium, and augmented levels of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins. In addition, the integrity of detergent resistant membranes was not affected by the absence of the LmDAT gene. Further, our genetic analyses strongly suggest that LmDAT was synthetic lethal with the glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase encoding gene LmGAT, implying that Leishmania expresses only two acyltransferases that initiate the biosynthesis of its cellular glycerolipids. Last, despite the fact that LmDAT is important for virulence the null mutant still exhibited the typical characteristics of metacyclics.
Here we show that absence of Sep-tRNA:Sec-tRNA synthase (SepSecS) a key enzyme required for the synthesis of the three trypanosomal selenoproteins does not affect growth of bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei. Both life cycle stages of T. brucei are highly sensitive to auranofin, a compound known to target selenoproteins. However, the same sensitivity is observed in the SepSecS double knockout cell lines indicating that the trypanocidal action of auranofin is not connected to selenoproteins. Finally, we show that absence of selenoproteins does not increase sensitivity to H(2)O(2)-induced oxidative stress. Thus in cell culture normal growth of procyclic and bloodstream T. brucei does not depend on selenoproteins.
The osteo-anabolic effects of intermittent parathyroid hormone (PTH) treatment require insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling through the IGF-I receptor. A major downstream target of the IGF-I receptor (via Akt) is the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a kinase involved in protein synthesis. We investigated whether the bone-building effects of intermittent PTH require functional mTOR signaling. Mice were treated with daily PTH 1-34 (0, 10, 30, or 90 microg/kg) for 6 weeks in the presence or absence of rapamycin, a selective inhibitor of mTOR. We found that all PTH doses were effective in enhancing bone mass, whether rapamycin was present or not. Rapamycin had little to no effect on the anabolic response at low (10 microg) PTH doses, small effects in a minority of anabolic measures at moderate doses (30 microg), but the anabolic effects of high-dose PTH (90 microg) were consistently and significantly suppressed by rapamycin ( approximately 4-36% reduction). Serum levels of Trap5b, a marker of resorption, were significantly enhanced by rapamycin, but these effects were observed whether PTH was absent or present. Our data suggest that intermittent PTH, particularly at lower doses, is effective in building bone mass in the presence of rapamycin. However, the full anabolic effects of higher doses of PTH are significantly suppressed by rapamycin, suggesting that PTH might normally activate additional pathways (including mTOR) for its enhanced high-dose anabolic effects. Clinical doses of intermittent PTH could be an effective treatment for maintaining or increasing bone mass among patients taking rapamycin analogs for unrelated health issues.
The stress protein p8 is a small, highly basic, unfolded, and multifunctional protein. We have previously shown that most of its functions are exerted through interactions with other proteins, whose activities are thereby enhanced or repressed. In this work we describe another example of such mechanism, by which p8 binds and negatively regulates MSL1, a histone acetyl transferase (HAT)-associated protein, which in turn binds the DNA-damage-associated 53BP1 protein to facilitate DNA repair following DNA gamma-irradiation. Contrary to the HAT-associated activity, MSL1-dependent DNA-repair activity is almost completely dependent on 53BP1 expression. The picture that has emerged from our findings is that 53BP1 could be a scaffold that gets the HAT MSL1-dependent DNA-repair activity to the sites of DNA damage. Finally, we also found that, although p8 expression is transiently activated after gamma-irradiation, it is eventually submitted to sustained down-regulation, presumably to allow development of MSL1-associated DNA-repair activity. We conclude that interaction of MSL1 with 53BP1 brings MSL1-dependent HAT activity to the vicinity of damaged DNA. MSL1-dependent HAT activity, which is negatively regulated by the stress protein p8, induces chromatin remodeling and relaxation allowing access to DNA of the repair machinery.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadliest form of primary brain cancer in adults. Despite advances in molecular biology and genetics of gliomas currently there is no effective treatment or promising molecularly targeted experimental therapeutic strategies for these tumors. In previous studies we have shown aberrant overexpression of the class III beta-tubulin isotype (betaIII-tubulin) in GBM and have proposed that this change may reflect perturbations in microtubule dynamics associated with glioma tumorigenesis, tumor progression and malignant transformation into GBM. This minireview focuses on microtubules and tubulin as emerging targets in potential therapy of GBM using a new class of betaIII-tubulin-targeted drugs in the light of recent developments concerning the function and potential role of this isotype in clinically aggressive tumor behavior, cancer stem cells, tumor hypoxia and chemoresistance to tubulin binding agents, principally taxanes.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadliest form of primary brain cancer in adults. Despite advances in molecular biology and genetics of cancer there is no currently available treatment for these tumors. Aberrant patterns of gamma-tubulin expression and compartmentalization in GBM have been reported lending credence to the assertion that these changes might underlie perturbations in microtubule nucleation and mitosis associated with glioma tumorigenesis and tumor progression. This minireview focuses on the role of gamma-tubulin in the pathobiology of GBM in the light of emerging concepts concerning the function of gamma-tubulin and its potential role in tumorigenesis putting forward the concept that gamma-tubulin might serve as a novel marker of anaplastic change in gliomas.
Heparin (HP) inhibits pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell (PASMC) growth in vitro and vascular remodeling in vivo. Bârzu et al. (1994) suggested that the antiproliferative effect of HP on rat aortic smooth muscle cell in vitro diminishes with prolonged exposure to heparin. We exposed cultured bovine PASMC (BPASMC) to prolonged pretreatment with 20 microg/ml of 0-hexanoylated HP from passages 3 to13 and compared them to control (no pretreatment) cultures of identical passages. The pretreated BPASMC and control groups were growth arrested for 48 h, followed by treatment of 0-hexanoylated HP at different doses. On day 5, the growth inhibition of BPASMC was determined. The percent inhibition by 1 microg/ml of 0-hexanoylated HP was 46 +/- 14% versus 62 +/- 13%, for control and pretreated BPASMC, respectively. At 10 microg/ml the inhibition was 62 +/- 7% versus 84 +/- 6%. For 100 microg/ml the inhibition increased to 92 +/- 5% versus 100% and at 200 microg/ml the inhibition was 95 +/- 3% versus 100%. BPASMC (with or without preexposure to 0-hexanoylated HP), at passage 13, were sensitive to the growth inhibitory effect of 0-hexanoylated HP with no significant difference among the groups (95 +/- 3% inhibition vs. 100% for pretreated BPASMC). We found that 0-hexanoylated HP-induced necrosis as shown by flow cytometry and only minor apoptosis. Caspase-3 and PARP detection was insignificant between the groups. In summary, no cell subpopulation at long-term treatment exhibited resistance to 0-hexanoylated HP. The HP antiproliferative effect on SMC is potentially important in defining new approaches to the treatment of the remodeled vasculature of pulmonary hypertension. Liss, Inc.
The receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) plays a critical role in the differentiation and bone resorptive activity of osteoclasts. Recently, the development of anti-resorptive agents from natural substances has become a subject of interest. Therefore, we evaluated the effects of 222 natural compounds on the RANKL-induced tartrate-resistance acid phosphatase (TRAP; a marker for osteoclast differentiation) activity and multinucleated osteoclast formation in RAW264.7 murine macrophage cells. We found that saurolactam was one of the compounds inhibiting the RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis; it significantly inhibited the RANKL-induced TRAP activity and formation of multinucleated osteoclasts without any cytotoxicity. Interestingly, saurolactam prevented RANKL-induced activation of MAP kinases and NF-kappaB, and mRNA expression of osteoclast-related genes and transcription factors (c-Fos, Fra-2, and NFATc1). We also observed the inhibitory effect of saurolactam on the differentiation of mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages into osteoclasts. Furthermore, saurolactam inhibited the bone resorptive activity of mature osteoclasts with the induction of apoptotic signaling cascade and the inhibition of survival signaling pathways such as c-Src/PI3K/Akt, Ras/ERK, and JNK/c-Jun. In conclusion, although further studies are needed to determine the precise mechanism and biological efficacy of saurolactam in osteoclast-mediated bone disorders, our results demonstrate that saurolactam potentially inhibits osteoclast differentiation by preventing the activation of MAP kinases and transcription factors that consequently affect the regulation of genes required for osteoclastogenesis, and the bone resorptive activity of mature osteoclasts by inhibiting osteoclast survival-related signaling pathways and triggering the apoptotic signaling cascade.
Receptor activator NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL)-activated signaling is essential for osteoclast differentiation, activation and survival. Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), a natural NF-kappaB inhibitor from honeybee propolis has been shown to have anti-tumor and anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, we investigated the effect of CAPE on the regulation of RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis, bone resorption and signaling pathways. Low concentrations of CAPE (<1 microM) dose dependently inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis in RAW264.7 cell and bone marrow macrophage (BMM) cultures, as well as decreasing the capacity of human osteoclasts to resorb bone. CAPE inhibited both constitutive and RANKL-induced NF-kappaB and NFAT activation, concomitant with delayed IkappaBalpha degradation and inhibition of p65 nuclear translocation. At higher concentrations, CAPE induced apoptosis and caspase 3 activities of RAW264.7 and disrupts the microtubule network in osteoclast like (OCL) cells. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that inhibition of NF-kappaB and NFAT activation by CAPE results in the attenuation of osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption, implying that CAPE is a potential treatment for osteolytic bone diseases.
The components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and their differential expression patterns play important roles in tissue formation. The deposition of latent TGF-beta binding proteins (LTBPs) to the ECM exhibit distinct distribution profiles. We have analyzed here the temporal and spatial ECM association of latent TGF-beta binding protein LTBP-2 in cultured human embryonic lung fibroblasts. We found that LTBP-2 was not assembled to the ECM until by confluency of cultures following the deposition of fibronectin (FN) and fibrillin-1. In 5-day-old cultures LTBP-2 was rapidly secreted from cells and it subsequently associated with the ECM as shown by metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation. LTBP-2 colocalized transiently with fibronectin and failed to assemble to the ECM of FN deficient mouse fibroblasts. Analysis of different cultured human cell lines revealed partial colocalization of LTBP-2 and fibrillin-1 in the ECM of fibroblasts, MG-63 osteosarcoma cells and human vascular endothelial cells. Silencing of fibrillin-1 expression by lentiviral shRNAs profoundly disrupted the deposition of LTBP-2. Current results suggest that LTBP-2 is not an element of the provisional ECM of fibroblasts but is more likely a component of more mature ECM and indicate that matrix association of LTBP-2 depends on a pre-formed fibrillin-1 network.
Metabolic control analysis of tumor glycolysis has indicated that hexokinase (HK) and glucose transporter (GLUT) exert the main flux control (71%). To understand why they are the main controlling steps, the GLUT and HK kinetics and the contents of GLUT1, GLUT2, GLUT3, GLUT4, HKI, and HKII were analyzed in rat hepatocarcinoma AS-30D and HeLa human cervix cancer. An improved protocol to determine the kinetic parameters of GLUT was developed with D-[2-(3)H-glucose] as physiological substrate. Kinetic analysis revealed two components at low- and high-glucose concentrations in both tumor cells. At low glucose and 37 degrees C, the V(max) was 55 +/- 20 and 17.2 +/- 6 nmol (min x mg protein)(-1), whereas the K(m) was 0.52 +/- 0.7 and 9.3 +/- 3 mM for hepatoma and HeLa cells, respectively. GLUT activity was partially inhibited by cytochalasin B (IC(50) = 0.44 +/- 0.1; K(i) = 0.3 +/- 0.1 microM) and phloretin (IC(50) = 8.7 microM) in AS-30D hepatocarcinoma. At physiological glucose, GLUT1 and GLUT3 were the predominant active isoforms in HeLa cells and AS-30D cells, respectively. HK activity in HeLa cells was much lower (60 mU/mg protein) than that in AS-30D cells (700 mU/mg protein), but both HKs were strongly inhibited by G6P. HKII was the predominant isoform in AS-30D carcinoma and HeLa cells. The much lower GLUT V(max) and catalytic efficiency (V(max)/K(m)) values in comparison to those of G6P-sensitive HK suggested the transporter exerts higher control on the glycolytic flux than HK in cancer cells. Thus, GLUT seems a more adequate therapeutic target.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) can differentiate and proliferate in response to hematopoietic stress (e.g., myelosuppression, infections, and allergic reactions), thereby ensuring a well-regulated supply of mature and immature hematopoietic cells within the circulation and prompt adjustment of blood cell levels within normal ranges. The recovery of tissues and organs from hematopoietic stress (e.g., myelosuppression or ionizing irradiation) is dependent on two cell types: resident HSCs which repopulate the bone marrow (BM) cavity, and stromal cells. BM regeneration critically depends on the release of soluble factors from cells such as stromal cells, a process regulated by proteases. Two proteolytic systems, the fibrinolytic system and the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), have recently been shown to be involved in this process (Heissig B, 2007, Cell Stem Cell 1: 658-670). The plasminogen/plasmin system is mostly recognized for its fibrinolytic activity, but it is also involved in processes such as cell invasion, chemotaxis, growth factor activity modulation, and tissue remodeling. This review focuses on the role of plasmin and its activators as key players in controlling the hematopoietic stress response after myelosuppression (hematopoietic regeneration). Aspects of plasmin regulation, especially regulation of its ability to activate MMPs and the functional consequences of this enzyme activation, such as plasmin-mediated release of biologically relevant cytokines from the matrix and cell surfaces, will be discussed.
The lung epithelial surface is one of the vital barriers or sensors in the body responding to the external atmosphere and thereby always subjecting to direct toxicological exposure, stress, stimulus, or infection. Due to its relatively higher sensitivity in response to toxicants, the use of lung epithelial cell culture and lung tissue from animal models or patients has facilitated our learning to lung physiopathology and toxicopharmacology. The recent advancement of proteomics has made it possible to investigate the cellular response at a global level. In this review, the potential applications of proteomic approach in studying lung-related diseases and biomarker discovery will be discussed.
Insulin has been known for a long time to influence the growth and differentiation of normal and transformed cells. In order to delineate the role of insulin specifically in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), we have now searched by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for the presence of insulin in NSCLC samples. Among the 112 samples we studied, 30 were found to contain insulin, which was detected in the form of intracytoplasmic granula. Moreover, its expression significantly correlated with (a) the morphological/histopathological subtype of NSCLC, being more frequent in adenocarcinomas; (b) the grade of tumor differentiation, displaying an increase in low-grade carcinomas; (c) tumor size, occurring predominantly in smaller tumors; (d) the presence of phosphorylated, activated insulin receptor; (e) the median patient age, being present in relatively younger individuals. Furthermore and interestingly, surrounding atypical adenomatous hyperplastic areas and normal alveolar pneumocytes scored insulin-positive in some of the insulin-negative tumors. In addition, PCR exploration for insulin transcripts in some samples positive for immunoreactive insulin was negative, indicating a possibly exogenous origin for the intracellular insulin in our NSCLC cohort. Taken together, our data suggest that an intracellular insulin activity is important for the progression of low-grade human lung adenocarcinomas.
Mutations in the dystrophin gene cause an X-linked genetic disorder: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Stem cell therapy is an attractive method to treat DMD because a small number of cells are required to obtain a therapeutic effect. Here, we discussed about multiple types of myogenic stem cells and their possible use to treat DMD. The identification of a stem cell population providing efficient muscle regeneration is critical for the progression of cell therapy for DMD. We speculated that the most promising possibility for the treatment of DMD is a combination of different approaches, such as gene and stem cell therapy.
Following our recent findings on the presence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) in the normal human adrenal cortex and in adrenocortical tumors, especially in cortisol-secreting tumors, aim of the present study was to investigate the direct effects of HCMV infection on human adrenocortical cells. To this aim, both clinical isolates and laboratory strains of HCMV were used to assess the early effects of infection on human adrenocortical cell morphology, proliferation, gene expression, and steroidogenic function. Both clinical and laboratory HCMV strains could infect and replicate in primary human adrenocortical cell cultures and in adrenocortical carcinoma cell lines, leading to cytopathic changes. Most importantly, in the first hours post-infection (p.i.), adrenocortical cells showed a significant increase of cortisol and estrogen production, paralleled by up-regulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and expression of steroidogenic enzymes involved in the last steps of adrenal steroidogenesis. This effect was probably due to HCMV immediate-early gene expression, since it was most evident in the early phases p.i. and UV-inactivated viral particles did not affect hormone production. Moreover, the effect on steroidogenesis was HCMV specific, since it was not observed after infection with herpes simplex virus. These data suggest that human adrenocortical cells are permissive to HCMV infection and acutely respond to infection with increased cortisol production. An acute glucocorticoid response is typically triggered by infections and is considered to be critical to host defense against pathogens, although, in the case of HCMV infection, it might also enhance viral replication and reactivation from latency.
The goal of the investigation was to test the hypothesis that the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway regulates the expression of the major extracellular matrix component of the intervertebral disc, aggrecan, in nucleus pulposus cells. Primary rat nucleus pulposus cells were treated with PI3K inhibitor to measure changes in gene and protein expression. In addition, cells were transfected with various luciferase reporter plasmids to investigate mechanisms of regulation of aggrecan gene expression. We found that treatment of nucleus pulposus cells with a PI3K inhibitor, LY294002 resulted in decreased expression of aggrecan and a reduction in deposition of sulfated glycosaminoglycans. Moreover, pharmacological suppression or co-expression of dominant negative (DN)-PI3K or DN-AKT resulted in downregulation of aggrecan promoter activity. Expression of constitutively active (CA)-PI3K significantly induced aggrecan promoter activity. We observed that PI3K maintained Sox9 gene expression and activity: inhibition of PI3K/AKT resulted in decreased Sox9 expression, lowered promoter activity, and mediated a reduction in Sox9 transcriptional activity. PI3K effects were independent of phosphorylation status of C-terminus transactivation domain (TAD) of Sox9. Finally, we noted that in nucleus pulposus cells, PI3K signaling controlled transactivation of p300 (p300-TAD activity), an important transcriptional co-activator of Sox9. Results of these studies demonstrate for the first time that PI3K/AKT signaling controls aggrecan gene expression, in part by modulating Sox9 expression and activity in cells of the nucleus pulposus.
We have previously reported that the dynein light chain (DLC) km23-1 is required for Smad2-dependent TGFbeta signaling. Here we describe another member of the km23/DYNLRB/LC7/robl family of DLCs, termed km23-2, which is also involved in TGFbeta signaling. We show not only that TGFbeta stimulates the interaction of km23-2 (DYNLRB2) with TGFbeta receptor II (TbetaRII) but also that TGFbeta regulates the interaction between km23-2 and endogenous TbetaRII in vivo. In addition, TGFbeta treatment causes km23-2 phosphorylation, whereas a kinase-deficient form of TbetaRII prevents km23-2 phosphorylation. In contrast to the km23-1 isoform, blockade of km23-2 expression using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) decreased key TGFbeta/Smad3-specific responses, including the induction of both plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) gene expression and p21 protein expression. Blockade of km23-1 expression had no effect on these two major TGFbeta/Smad3 responses under similar conditions. Further, km23-2 was required for TGFbeta stimulation of Smad3-dependent Smad-binding element (SBE)2-Luc transcriptional activity, but not for TGFbeta stimulation of Smad2-dependent activin responsive element (ARE)-Lux transcriptional activity. In order to assess the mechanisms underlying the preferential stimulation of Smad3- versus Smad2-specific TGFbeta responses, immunoprecipitation (IP)/blot analyses were performed, which demonstrate that TGFbeta stimulated preferential complex formation of km23-2 with Smad3, relative to Smad2. Collectively, our findings indicate that km23-2 is required for Smad3-dependent TGFbeta signaling. More importantly, we demonstrate that km23-2 has functions in TGFbeta signaling that are distinct from those for km23-1. This is the first report to describe a differential requirement for unique isoforms of a specific DLC family in Smad-specific TGFbeta signaling.
Tumor cell resistance to chemotherapy constitutes a major problem in the treatment of malignant tumors. We here investigated the role of ceramide metabolism for the resistance of glioma cells to treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug, gemcitabine. Gemcitabine triggers a marked release of ceramide in drug-sensitive cells, while glioma cells that are resistant to gemcitabine, fail to accumulate ceramide. While the release of ceramide is very similar in gemcitabine-sensitive and resistant glioma cells upon stimulation, resistant glioma cells rapidly consume ceramide upon gemcitabine treatment or exogenous sphingomyelinase stimulation. Pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of glucosyltransferases prevents ceramide consumption in resistant cells and restores sensitivity of resistant glioma cells to gemcitabine. These data suggest that glioma cell resistance to at least some chemotherapeutic drugs is mediated by rapid consumption of ceramide to prevent cell death.
Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) plays a key role in the regulation of calcium-dependent gene expression. The expression of CaMKIV and the activation of CREB regulated genes are involved in memory and neuronal survival. We report here that: (a) a bioinformatic analysis of 15,476 promoters of the human genome predicted several Wnt target genes, being CaMKIV a very interesting candidate; (b) CaMKIV promoter contains TCF/LEF transcription motifs similar to those present in Wnt target genes; (c) biochemical studies indicate that lithium and the canonical ligand Wnt-3a induce CaMKIV mRNA and protein expression levels in rat hippocampal neurons as well as CaMKIV promoter activity; (d) treatment of hippocampal neurons with Wnt-3a increases the binding of beta-catenin to the CaMKIV promoter: (e) In vivo activation of the Wnt signaling improve spatial memory impairment and restores the expression of CaMKIV in a mice double transgenic model for Alzheimer's disease which shows decreased levels of the kinase. We conclude that CaMKIV is regulated by the Wnt signaling pathway and that its expression could play a role in the neuroprotective function of the Wnt signaling against the Alzheimer's amyloid peptide.
ClC-2 chloride channel is present in the brain and some transporting epithelia where its function is poorly understood. We have now demonstrated that the surface channels are rapidly internalised and approximately the 70% of the surface membrane protein recycles after 4- to 8-min internalisation. Endocytosis of ClC-2 was dependent upon tyrosine 179 located within an endocytic motif. Rapid recycling accompanied by an even faster internalisation could account for the abundant presence of ClC-2 in intracellular membranous structures. At least a proportion of ClC-2 resides in lipid rafts. Use of beta-cyclodextrin led to an increase in cell surface channel, but, surprisingly, a decrease in functionally active channels. We suggest that ClC-2 requires residing in beta-cyclodextrin sensitive clusters with other molecules in order to remain active. Regulation of ClC-2 trafficking to and within the membrane could be a means of modulating its activity.
Our previous studies have shown that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) enhances bone/cementum-related protein gene expression through the TrkB-c-Raf-ERK1/2-Elk-1 signaling pathway in cementoblasts, which play a critical role in the establishment of a functional periodontal ligament. To clarify how BDNF regulates survival in cementoblasts, we examined its effects on cell death induced by serum starvation in immortalized human cementoblast-like (HCEM) cells. BDNF inhibited the death of HCEM cells. Small-interfering RNA (siRNA) for TRKB, a high affinity receptor for BDNF, and for Bcl-2, countered the BDNF-induced decrease in dead cell number. In addition, LY294002, a PI3-kinase inhibitor; SH-6, an Akt inhibitor; and PDTC, a nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) inhibitor, but not PD98059, an ERK1/2 inhibitor, abolished the protective effect of BDNF against cell death. BDNF enhanced phosphorylated Akt levels, NF-kappaB activity in the nucleus, Bcl-2 mRNA levels, and mitochondrial membrane potential. The blocking of BDNF's actions by treatment with siRNA in all cases for TRKB and Bcl-2, LY294002, SH-6, and PDTC suppressed the enhancement. These findings provide the first evidence that a TrkB-PI3-kinase-Akt-NF-kappaB-Bcl-2 signaling pathway triggered by BDNF and the subsequent protective effect of BDNF on mitochondrial membrane potential are required to rescue HCEM cells from serum starvation-induced cell death. Furthermore, the survival and increased expression of bone/cementum-related proteins induced by BDNF in HCEM cells occur through different signaling pathways.
The role of OxLDL in the generation and progression of atherosclerosis is well admitted. In addition, it is well known that atherosclerosis is often accompanied by perturbations in bone remodeling, resulting in osteoporosis. In the current studies, the effect of Cu(2+)-oxidized LDL (OxLDL) on RANKL-induced RAW264.7 mouse monocytes-macrophages differentiation to osteoclasts and on RANKL signaling pathway was investigated. OxLDL, within the range of 10-50 microg protein/ml, prevented RANKL-induced generation of multinucleated osteoclast-like cells and RANKL-induced tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) activity. OxLDL also prevented the RANKL-induced phosphorylation of ERK, p38 and JNK kinases, together with the RANKL-induced DNA binding activities of NFkappaB and NFAT transcription factors. Concomitantly, OxLDL enhanced RANKL-induced generation of reactive oxygen species in a dose-dependent manner. The antioxidant glutathione (GSH) prevented whereas the prooxidant compound buthionine-sulfoximine (BSO) enhanced the effect of OxLDL on RANKL-induced oxidative stress and RANKL-induced differentiation. Finally, OxLDL also prevented RANKL-induced TRAP activity and RANKL-induced bone resorbing activity of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. These results demonstrate that OxLDL, by generation of an intracellular oxidative stress, prevents the differentiation of osteoclasts by inhibition of RANKL signaling pathway. This might be related to the fact that atherosclerosis is accompanied by perturbations in bone and vascular remodeling, leading to osteoporosis and vascular calcification.
The expression profile and functions of the brain-enriched Rab22B/Rab31 small GTPase had remained uncharacterized. Using specific antibodies against Rab22B, we found the protein to be exceptionally enriched in nestin and RC2-positive radial glia of the embryonic mouse brain. In the adult brain, Rab22B is rather specifically expressed in glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive mature astrocytes, but is not clearly detectable in either 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNPase)-positive mature oligodendrocytes or betaIII-tubulin (TuJ)-positive neurons. In probing for specific functions of Rab22B, we found that Rab22B silencing in A431 cells resulted in abnormal trafficking of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), Texas-red-labeled EGF, and the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (M6PR). Affinity pull-down assays and co-immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that Rab22B could associate with EGFR in a GTP-dependent manner. Rab22B is thus a Rab protein specifically expressed in the astroglia lineage and may have a role in regulating EGFR trafficking in some cell types. Given that EGFR signaling modulates astrocyte development and oncogenesis of multiple cell types, Rab22B may thus have specific developmental or pathophysiological roles in cell types which it is enriched in.
Up to date, the nature of the sepsis-induced vascular leakage is understood only partially, which limits pharmacological approaches for its management. Here we studied the protective effect of cAMP using endotoxin-induced hyperpermeability as a model for barrier dysfunction observed in gram-negative sepsis. We demonstrated that the alleviation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced barrier compromise could be achieved by the specific activation of either protein kinase A (PKA) or Epac with cAMP analogs Bnz-cAMP or O-Me-cAMP, respectively. We next studied the involvement of PKA substrates VASP and filamin1 in barrier maintenance and LPS-induced barrier compromise. Depletion of both VASP and filamin1 with the specific siRNAs significantly exacerbated both the quiescent cells barrier and LPS-induced barrier dysfunction, suggesting barrier-protective role of these proteins. VASP depletion was associated with the more severe loss of ZO-1 peripheral staining in response to LPS, whereas filamin1-depleted cells reacted to LPS with more robust stress fiber induction and more profound changes in ZO-1 and VE-cadherin peripheral organization. Both VASP and filamin1 phosphorylation was significantly increased as a result of PKA activation. We next analyzed the effect of VASP and filamin1 depletion on the PKA-dependent alleviation of LPS-induced barrier compromise. We observed that Bnz-cAMP ability to counteract LPS-induced hyperpermeability was attenuated only by VASP, but not filamin1 depletion. Our data indicate that while PKA-dependent VASP phosphorylation contributes to the protective effect of cAMP elicited on LPS-compromised monolayers, filamin1 phosphorylation is unlikely to play a significant role in this process.
Osteoblasts, originating from mesenchymal stem cells, play a pivotal role in bone formation and mineralization. Several transcription factors including runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) have been reported to be essential for osteoblast differentiation, whereas the cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways controlling the differentiation process have not been fully elucidated. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine-threonine kinase generally regarded as a key regulator of cellular energy homeostasis, polarity, and division. Recent lines of evidence have indicated that the activity of the catalytic alpha subunit of AMPK is regulated through its phosphorylation by upstream AMPK kinases (AMPKKs) including LKB1. Here, we explored the role of AMPK in osteoblast differentiation using in vitro culture models. Phosphorylation of AMPKalpha was significantly decreased during osteoblastic differentiation in both primary osteoblasts and MC3T3-E1, a mouse osteoblastic cell line. Conversely, the terminal differentiation of primary osteoblasts and MC3T3-E1 cells, represented by matrix mineralization, was significantly inhibited by glucose restriction and stimulation with metformin, both of which are known activators of AMPK. Matrix mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells was also inhibited by the forced expression of a constitutively active form of AMPKalpha. Metformin significantly inhibited gene expression of Runx2 along with osteoblast differentiation markers including osteocalcin (Ocn), bone sialo protein (Bsp), and osteopontin (Opn). Thus, our present data indicate that differentiation of osteoblasts is functionally associated with decreased AMPK activity.
Bradykinin (BK) is a potent modulator of biological processes in the retina, and retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE) and the regulation of glutamate are believed to be important in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy. However, the mechanism by which BK regulates glutamate uptake in RPE cells in diabetic retinopathy is unknown. Here, we examined the involvement of BK receptors in high glucose-induced dysfunction of glutamate uptake in human ARPE cells. High glucose stimulated glutamate uptake and the expression of excitatory amino acid transporter-4 (EAAT4) mRNA, and these were blocked by treatment with small interfering RNA (siRNA) for BK1 receptor (B1R) and BK2 receptor (B2R), but not scrambled siRNA, supporting an involvement of B1R and B2R in this process. High glucose-stimulated glutamate uptake was also blocked by the B1R antagonist [des-Arg(10)]-HOE 140 and the B2R antagonist HOE 140. High glucose increased B1R and B2R mRNA and protein expression in a time-dependent manner, increased B1R and B2R translocation from the cytosol to the nucleus, and stimulated kininogen, kallikrein, and kininase I mRNA expression. We examined whether BK receptors were involved in high glucose-induced signaling pathways. High glucose stimulated arachidonic acid release, cytosolic phospholipase A(2) and cyclooxygenase-2 proteins, nuclear factor-kappaB activation, and inhibitor-kappaB activation; these events were blocked by treatment with B1R and B2R siRNAs, but not scrambled siRNA. In addition, high glucose-induced stimulation of glutamate uptake was blocked by the cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors arachidonyl trifluoromethyl ketone, mepacrine, 5-bromo-2-(4-fluorophenyl)-3-[4-(methyl-sulfonyl)phenyl]-thiophene, and N-[2-cyclohexyloxy-4-nitrophenyl] methane-sulfonamide, and by the nuclear factor-kappaB inhibitors pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate and SN-50.
In the last few years, a major goal of cardiac research has been to drive stem cell differentiation to replace damaged myocardium. Several research groups have attempted to differentiate potential cardiac stem cells (CSCs) using bi- or three-dimensional systems supplemented with growth factors or molecules acting as differentiating substances. We hypothesize that these systems failed to induce a complete differentiation because they lacked an architectural space. In the present study, we isolated a pool of small proliferating and fibroblast-like cells from adult rat myocardium. The phenotype of these cells was assessed and the characterized cells were cultured in a collagen I/OPLA scaffold with horse serum to obtain fine myocardial differentiation. C-Kit(POS)/Sca-1(POS) CSCs fully differentiated in vitro when an environment more similar to the CSC niche was created. These experiments demonstrated an important model for the study of the biology of CSCs and the biochemical pathways that lead to myocardial differentiation. The results pave the way for a new surgical approach.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are well known to have the capability to form bone and cartilage, and chondrogenesis derived from MSCs is reported to be affected by mechanical stimuli. This research was aimed to study the effects of cyclic compressive stress on the chondrogenic differentiation of rat bone marrow-derived MSCs (BMSCs) which were encapsulated in alginate scaffolds and cultured with or without chondrogenic medium, and to investigate the role of p38 MAPK phospho-relay cascade in this process. The results show that the gene expression of chondrocyte-specific markers of Col2alpha1, aggrecan, Sox9, Runx2, and Ihh was upregulated by dynamic compressive stress introduced at the 8th day of chondrogenic differentiation in vitro. The p38 MAPK was activated by chondrogenic cytokines in a slow and lagged way, but activated by cyclic compressive stimulation in a rapid and transient manner. And inhibition of p38 activity with SB203580 suppressed gene expression of chondrocyte-specific genes stimulated by chondrogenic medium and (or) cyclic compressive stress. These findings suggest that p38 MAPK signal acts as an essential mediator in the mechano-biochemical transduction and subsequent transcriptional regulation in the process of chondrogenesis.
Ethanol induces neuronal cell injury and death by dysregulating several signaling events that are controlled, in part, by activation of MAPK/ERK1/2 and/or inactivation of its corresponding phosphatase, PP1. Recently, we have purified a novel protein of 38 kDa in size, p38SJ, from a callus culture of Hypericum perforatum, which belongs to an emerging DINGG family of proteins with phosphate binding activity. Here, we show that treatment of neuronal cells with p38SJ protects cells against injury induced by exposure to ethanol. Furthermore, pre-treatment of neuronal cells with p38SJ diminishes the level of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and some events associated with apoptosis such as caspase 3 cleavage. In addition, by inducing stress, alcohol can elevate production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that leads to a decrease in the activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD). Our results showed that p38SJ restores the activity of SOD in the ethanol treated neuronal cells. These observations provide a novel biological tool for developing new approaches for preventing neuronal cell death induced by ethanol and possibly treatment of neurological disorders associated with alcohol abuse.
Bone formation and osteoblast differentiation require the functional expression of the Runx2/Cbfbeta heterodimeric transcription factor complex. Runx2 is also a suppressor of proliferation in osteoblasts by attenuating cell cycle progression in G(1). Runx2 levels are modulated during the cell cycle, which are maximal in G(1) and minimal beyond the G(1)/S phase transition (S, G(2), and M phases). It is not known whether Cbfbeta gene expression is cell cycle controlled in preosteoblasts nor how Runx2 or Cbfbeta are regulated during the cell cycle in bone cancer cells. We investigated Runx2 and Cbfbeta gene expression during cell cycle progression in MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts, as well as ROS17/2.8 and SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. Runx2 protein levels are reduced as expected in MC3T3-E1 cells arrested in late G(1) (by mimosine) or M phase (by nocodazole), but not in cell cycle arrested osteosarcoma cells. Cbfbeta protein levels are cell cycle independent in both osteoblasts and osteosarcoma cells. In synchronized MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts progressing from late G1 or mitosis, Runx2 levels but not Cbfbeta levels are cell cycle regulated. However, both factors are constitutively elevated throughout the cell cycle in osteosarcoma cells. Proteasome inhibition by MG132 stabilizes Runx2 protein levels in late G(1) and S in MC3T3-E1 cells, but not in ROS17/2.8 and SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. Thus, proteasomal degradation of Runx2 is deregulated in osteosarcoma cells. We propose that cell cycle control of Runx2 gene expression is impaired in osteosarcomas and that this deregulation may contribute to the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma.
Several innate cellular antiviral factors exist in mammalian cells that prevent the replication of retroviruses. Among them, the tripartite motif protein (TRIM)5alpha has been shown to block human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection in several types of Old World monkey cells. Here we report a novel HIV-1 chronically infected monkey B cell line, F6/HIV-1, characterized by very low levels of TRIM5alpha expression that allows HIV-1 to overcome the restriction. Virus produced by F6/HIV-1 cells fails to infect monkey cells but retains the ability to infect human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and T cell lines, although with a reduced infectivity compared to the input virus. Ultrastructural analyses revealed the presence of budding virions at the F6/HIV-1 cells plasma membrane characterized by a typical conical core shell. To our knowledge F6/HIV-1 is the first monkey cell line chronically infected by HIV-1 and able to release infectious particles thus representing a useful tool to gain further insights into the molecular mechanisms of HIV-1 pathogenesis.
The polyamines spermidine, spermine, and putrescine are intimately involved in and required for cell growth and proliferation. There are also multiple effects of polyamines on other cellular processes that seem not to be a result of changes in protein expression. It is a daunting task to classify and understand cellular effects of endogenous polyamines. There has been no central hypothesis how these effects can occur or how spermine and spermidine could be targeted to various signal transduction cascades. However, now there is evidence that multiple effects of endogenous polyamines on different cellular processes may involve plasma membrane PI(4,5)P(2) and recent evidence of how polyamines could be targeted to specific cellular functions.
The nuclear protein methyl-transferase Retinoblastoma-interacting zinc-finger protein 1 (RIZ1) is considered to be a downstream effector of estrogen action in target tissues. Silencing of RIZ1 expression is common in many tumors. We analyzed RIZ1 expression in normal and malignant prostate tissue and evaluated whether estradiol (E2) or dihydrotestosterone (DHT) treatment modulated RIZ1 in cultured prostate epithelial cells (PEC). Moreover, we studied the possible involvement of RIZ1 in estrogen action on the EPN prostate cell line, constitutively expressing both estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha and beta. RIZ1 protein, found in the nucleus of normal PECs by immunohistochemistry, was progressively lost in cancer tissues as the Gleason score increased and was only detected in the cytoplasmic compartment. RIZ1 transcript levels, as assayed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR in primary PEC cultures, were significantly reduced in cancer cells (P < 0.05). In EPN DHT treatment significantly increased RIZ1 transcript and protein levels (P < 0.05); E2 induced a reduction of S phase without significant changes of RIZ1 expression. In E2-treated EPN cell extracts RIZ co-immunoprecipitated with ERbeta and ERalpha. Our data demonstrate that RIZ1 is expressed in normal PECs and down-regulated in cancer cells, with a switch of its sub-cellular localization from the nucleus to the cytoplasm upon cancer grade progression. RIZ1 expression levels in the PECs were modulated by DHT or E2 treatment in vitro. Furthermore, the E2 effects on ER-expressing prostate cells involve RIZ1, which confirms a possible role for ER-mediated pathways in a non-classic E(2)-target tissue.
Osteosarcomas are the most prevalent primary bone tumors found in pediatric patients. To understand their molecular etiology, cell culture models are used to define disease mechanisms under controlled conditions. Many osteosarcoma cell lines (e.g., SAOS-2, U2OS, MG63) are derived from Caucasian patients. However, patients exhibit individual and ethnic differences in their responsiveness to irradiation and chemotherapy. This motivated the establishment of osteosarcoma cell lines (OS1, OS2, OS3) from three ethnically Chinese patients. OS1 cells, derived from a pre-chemotherapeutic tumor in the femur of a 6-year-old female, were examined for molecular markers characteristic for osteoblasts, stem cells, and cell cycle control by immunohistochemistry, reverse transcriptase-PCR, Western blotting and flow cytometry. OS1 have aberrant G-banded karyotypes, possibly reflecting chromosomal abnormalities related to p53 deficiency. OS1 had ossification profiles similar to human fetal osteoblasts rather than SAOS-2 which ossifies ab initio (P < 0.05). Absence of p53 correlates with increased Runx2 expression, while the slow proliferation of OS1 cells is perhaps attenuated by pRB retention. OS1 express mesenchymal stem cell markers (CD44, CD105) and differ in relative expression of CD29, CD63, and CD71 to SAOS-2. (P < 0.05). Cell cycle synchronization with nocodazole did not affect Runx2 and CDK1 levels but decreased cyclin-E and increased cyclin-A (P < 0.05). Xenotransplantion of OS1 in SCID mice yields spontaneous tumors that were larger and grew faster than SAOS-2 transplants. Hence, OS1 is a new osteosarcoma cell culture model derived from a pre-chemotherapeutic ethnic Chinese patient, for mechanistic studies and development of therapeutic strategies to counteract metastasis and deregulation of mesenchymal development.
It has recently been shown that docetaxel chemotherapy is effective in prolonging life in patients with prostate cancer (PCa). We have investigated potential ways of increasing the effectiveness of chemotherapy in this disease. We have previously reported that sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) inhibition is a key step in docetaxel-induced apoptosis in the PC-3 PCa cell line and that pharmacologicalSphK1 inhibition is chemosensitizing in the docetaxel-resistant PCa LNCaP cell line. In this study we have addressed the mechanism of docetaxel-induced apoptosis of PC-3 cells and identified SphK1-dependent and -independent components. We have shown that SphK1 inhibition by docetaxel is a two-step process involving an initial loss of enzyme activity followed by a decrease in SphK1 gene expression. Using hormoneresistant PC-3 and DU145 PCa cells we have demonstrated that both pharmacological and siRNA-mediated SphK1 inhibition leads to a four-fold decrease in the docetaxel IC50 dose. This work points out to potential ways of increasing the effectiveness of chemotherapy for PCa by SphK1 inhibition.
For patients with brain tumors identification of diagnostic and prognostic markers in easy accessible biological material, such as plasma or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), would greatly facilitate patient management. MIC-1/GDF15 (growth differentiation factor 15) is a secreted protein of the TGF-beta superfamily and emerged as a candidate marker exhibiting increasing mRNA expression during malignant progression of glioma. Determination of MIC-1/GDF15 protein levels by ELISA in the CSF of a cohort of 94 patients with intracranial tumors including gliomas, meningioma and metastasis revealed significantly increased concentrations in glioblastoma patients (median, 229 pg/ml) when compared with control cohort of patients treated for non-neoplastic diseases (median below limit of detection of 156 pg/ml, p < 0.0001, Mann-Whitney test). However, plasma MIC-1/GDF15 levels were not elevated in the matching plasma samples from these patients. Most interestingly, patients with glioblastoma and increased CSF MIC-1/GDF15 had a shorter survival (p = 0.007, log-rank test). In conclusion, MIC-1/GDF15 protein measured in the CSF may have diagnostic and prognostic value in patients with intracranial tumors.
In the last years, microRNAs (miRNA) have emerged as new molecular players involved in carcinogenesis. Deregulation of miRNAs expression has been shown in different human cancer but the molecular mechanism underlying the alteration of miRNA expression is unknown. To identify tumor-supressor miRNAs silenced through aberrant epigenetic events in colorectal cancer (CRC), we used a sequential approach. We first identified 5 miRNAs down-regulated in patient with colorectal cancer samples and located around/on a CpG island. Treatment with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor and a HDAC inhibitor restored expression of 3 of the 5 microRNAs (hsa-miR-9, hsa-miR-129 and hsa-miR-137) in 3 CRC cell lines. Expression of hsa-miR-9 was inversely correlated with methylation of their promoter regions as measure by MSP and bisulphate sequencing. Further, methylation of the hsa-miR-9-1, hsa-miR-129-2 and hsa-miR-137 CpG islands were frequently observed in CRC cell lines and in primary CRC tumors, but not in normal colonic mucosa. Finally, methylation of hsa-miR-9-1 was associated with the presence of lymph node metastasis. In summary, our results aid in the understanding of miRNA gene regulation showing that aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications work together to induce silencing of miRNAs in CRC.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of an in vitro drug resistance assay to platinum and taxane in the management of advanced epithelial ovarian, fallopian and primary peritoneal cancer. All patients with FIGO Stage IIIc and IV who received postoperative chemotherapy with platinum and taxane for more than 4 courses after the initial cytoreductive surgery between 1995 and 2008 were evaluated. Patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy were not included. An in vitro drug resistance assay (EDR Assay, Oncotech, Tustin, CA) was used to determine drug resistance for each patient's tumor tissue. Level of drug resistance was described as extreme (EDR), intermediate (IDR), or low (LDR). Response to chemotherapy and survival were correlated to the EDR Assay. Of the 335 patients who underwent primary cytoreductive surgery, 173 cases met the criteria for statistical evaluation. The 58 patients (33.5%) whose tumors had LDR to both platinum and taxane had statistically improved progression-free survival and overall survival (OS) compared with the 115 patients (66.5%) who demonstrated IDR or EDR to platinum and/or taxane (5-year OS rates, 41.1% vs. 30.9%, p = 0.014). The 5-year OS rates for the 28 (16.2%) cases that had optimal cytoreduction with LDR to both platinum and taxane was significantly improved over the 62 (35.8%) cases that were suboptimally cytoreduced with IDR or EDR to platinum and/or taxane (54.1% vs. 20.4%, respectively, p < 0.001). In conclusion, LDR to both platinum and taxane chemotherapy, as determined by an in vitro drug resistance assay, independently predicts improved survival in patients with advanced epithelial ovarian, fallopian and peritoneal cancer, especially in those patients who undergo optimal primary cytoreduction.
HER3 (ERBB3) is a catalytically inactive pseudokinase of the HER receptor tyrosine kinase family, frequently overexpressed in prostate and other cancers. Aberrant expression and mutations of 2 other members of the family, EGFR and HER2, are key carcinogenic events in several types of tumors, and both are well- validated therapeutic targets. In this study, we show that HER3 is required to maintain the motile and invasive phenotypes of prostate (DU-145) and breast (MCF-7) cancer cells in response to the HER3 ligand neuregulin-1 (NRG-1), epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fetal bovine serum. Although MCF-7 breast cancer cells appeared to require HER3 as part of an autocrine response induced by EGF and FBS, the response of DU-145 prostate cancer cells to these stimuli, while requiring HER3, did not appear to involve autocrine stimulation of the receptor. DU-145 cells required the expression of HER3 for efficient clonogenicity in vitro in standard growth medium and for tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice. These observations suggest that prostate cancer cells derived from tumors that overexpress HER3 are dependent on its expression for the maintenance of major attributes of neoplastic aggressiveness, with or without cognate ligand stimulation.
Lonafarnib is a potent, selective farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI) undergoing clinical studies for the treatment of solid tumors and hematological malignancies. Preclinically, a number of FTIs, including lonafarnib, interact with taxanes to inhibit cancer cell growth in an additive/synergistic manner. These observations provided rationale for investigating the effects of combining lonafarnib and docetaxel on preclinical prostate cancer models. To date, docetaxel is the only chemotherapeutic agent in clinical use for hormone-refractory prostate cancer. In vitro experiments with 22Rv1, LNCaP, DU-145, PC3 and PC3-M prostate cancer cell lines showed significantly enhanced inhibition of cell proliferation and apoptosis when lonafarnib was added to docetaxel. In human tumor xenograft models, continuous coadministration of lonafarnib with docetaxel caused marked tumor regressions (24-47%) in tumors from all of the cell types as well as parental CWR22 xenografts. Intermittent dosing of lonafarnib (5 days on then 5 days off) coadministered with docetaxel produced similar regressions in hormone-refractory 22Rv1 tumors. 22Rv1 tumors progressing on docetaxel treatment also responded to treatment with intermittent lonafarnib (5 days on then 5 days off). Moreover, animals did not exhibit any signs of toxicity during coadministration of lonafarnib and docetaxel. In conclusion, coadministration of continuous and intermittent lonafarnib enhanced the antitumor activity of docetaxel in a panel of prostate cancer models. An intermittent dosing schedule of lonafarnib coadministered with docetaxel may allow enhanced efficacy to that of continuous dosing by improving the tolerability of higher doses of lonafarnib.
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a cytokine with potent immunosuppressive effects and is overexpressed in many tumors. Therefore, development of molecules able to inhibit TGF-beta is of paramount importance to improve the efficacy of antitumor immunotherapy. TGF-beta inhibitor peptides P144 and P17 were combined with the administration of adjuvant molecules poly(I:C) and agonistic anti-CD40 antibodies, and their effect on the growth of E.G7-OVA established tumors and on antitumor immune response was evaluated. Tumor rejection efficacy of a single administration of adjuvants was enhanced from 15 to 70 % when combined with repeated injections of TGF-beta inhibitor peptides. Simultaneous administration of adjuvants and TGF-beta inhibitor peptides was required for maximal therapeutic efficacy. Although tumor cells produced TGF-beta, it was found that the beneficial effect of peptide administration was mainly due to the inhibition of TGF-beta produced by regulatory CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells rather than by tumor cells. The enhanced antitumor effect was accompanied by a higher activity of dendritic cells, natural killer cells and tumor antigen-specific T cells, as well as by a decrease in the number of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. In conclusion, administration of peptide inhibitors of TGF-beta in therapeutic vaccination enhances the efficacy of immunotherapy by increasing antitumor immune responses. These peptide inhibitors may have important applications for current immunotherapeutic strategies.
An inverse association between serum total cholesterol and cancer mortality cast a controversy for cause or result of low cholesterol on cancer risk. Therefore, we examined a total of 33,368 Japanese men and women aged 40-69 years, who were free of prior diagnosis of cancer and cardiovascular disease, undertook serum total cholesterol measurement and completed a food frequency questionnaire between 1990 and 1994. They were followed to ascertain incident total and major sites of cancer until the end of 2004 to examine sex-specific associations between cholesterol and cancer risk by incident time, stage and virus infection. After 412,714 person-years of follow-up, 2,728 incident cancers were documented. Serum total cholesterol levels were inversely associated with risk of total cancer in men, with strong inverse associations with stomach cancer in men and liver cancer in both sexes. After exclusion for first 3-year incident cases and advanced cases with metastasis, the inverse association diminished for total and stomach cancers but remained for liver cancer. The multivariable hazard ratios (95% CI) for serum total cholesterol <4.14 mmol/l versus 4.65-5.16 mmol/l were 1.15(0.92-1.43); p-trend across the overall cholesterol categories = 0.25 for total cancer and 1.18(0.79-1.75), p-trend = 0.04 for stomach cancer and 5.12(1.65-15.9), p-trend = 0.0011 for liver cancer in men, and 5.73(1.57-20.9), p-trend = 0.0007 for liver cancer in women. The sustained excess risk of liver cancer associated with low cholesterol was observed regardless of hepatitis-C-virus infection and drinking habits. Although the inverse association for liver cancer remained to be examined further, our findings do not support that low serum total cholesterol levels increase risks of total cancer and other major sites.
Apc-deficient Min mice feature low expression of lipoprotein lipase (LPL), high concentration of serum triglyceride (TG), fatty change of the liver and large numbers of intestinal polyps. We have reported that induction of LPL expression reduces serum lipid, especially TG, improves fatty change of the liver and inhibits intestinal polyp formation in the mice. In this study, fatty change/lipid accumulation in intestinal mucosa and polyps in Min mice were analyzed by Oil-red O staining and electron microscopy. A number of large lipid droplets were found in the epithelia of the upper part of polyps. On the other hand, small lipid droplets were only slightly observed at the tip of the villi in non-tumoros parts of the small intestine of Min mice and in the villi of wild-type mice. Moreover, low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) was overexpressed in the area where lipid droplets were observed. The expression levels of LDLR mRNA in the intestinal polyps of Min mice were approximately 3 times higher compared to those in the non-tumoros parts. Remarkable expression of cyclooxygenase-2 was mainly distributed in stromal cells and some in epithelial cells. It is speculated that lipid accumulation in the intestinal polyps may play an important role in intestinal polyp formation in Apc-deficient mice.
It has been reported that polymorphisms of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes and several cytokine genes are associated with an increased risk of developing gastric cancer (GC). However, the results of studies from different geographic regions, ethnic groups and study groups are inconsistent. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of H. pylori infection and host genetic factors on GC susceptibility in Japanese patients with GC. We analyzed genotypes for HLA class I and II, tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-1 receptor, IL-4, IL-4Ralpha and IL-10 in 330 H. pylori-infected noncardia patients with GC and 190 H. pylori-infected nonulcer dyspeptic controls. Haplotype analyses indicated that the frequencies of the HLA DRB1*0405 and DQB1*0401 alleles were increased in the patients with intestinal-type GC when compared with controls (both DRB1*0405 and DQB1*0401: p = 0.015, OR = 1.57, 95% CI = 1.09-2.26), but the changes were not statistically significant after correction for multiple comparisons. None of the cytokine gene polymorphisms were associated with GC susceptibility, whether patients with GC were analyzed as a group according to the histological subtype. Of interest was the comparison of controls and patients with intestinal-type GC. The frequency of an IL-10-592AA homozygote showing concomitant carriage of the HLA DRB1*0405-DQB1*0401 haplotype was significantly higher in patients with intestinal-type GC (chi(2) = 6.369, p = 0.0116, p(c) = 0.0464, OR = 2.43, 95% CI = 1.21-4.48). Our results suggest that the HLA class II and IL-10-592A/C polymorphisms synergistically affect the susceptibility to GC development of H. pylori-infected individuals in the Japanese population.
Metastasis continues to be the leading cause of mortality for patients with cancer. Several years ago, it became clear that chemokines and their receptors could control the tumor progress. CXCR3 has now been identified in many cancers including osteosarcoma and CXCR3 ligands were expressed by lungs that are the primary sites to which this tumor metastasize. This study tested the hypothesis that disruption of the CXCR3/CXCR3 ligands complexes could lead to a decrease in lungs metastasis. The experimental design involved the use of the CXCR3 antagonist, AMG487 and 2 murine models of osteosarcoma lung metastases. After tail vein injection of osteosarcoma cells, mice that were systematically treated with AMG487 according to preventive or curative protocols had a significant reduction in metastatic disease. Treatment of osteosarcoma cells in vitro with AMG487 led to decreased migration, decreased matrix metalloproteinase activity, decreased proliferation/survival and increased caspase-independent death. Taken together, our results support the hypothesis that CXCR3 and their ligands intervene in the initial dissemination of the osteosarcoma cells to the lungs and stimulate the growth and expansion of the metastatic foci in later stages. Moreover, these studies indicate that targeting CXCR3 may specifically inhibit tumor metastasis without adversely affecting antitumoral host response.
Housekeeping (HK) genes are involved in basic cellular functions and tend to be constitutively expressed across various tissues and conditions. A number of studies have analyzed the value of HK genes as an internal standard for assessing gene expression, but the role of HK genes in cancer development has never been specifically addressed. In this study, we sought to evaluate the expression of HK genes during prostate tumorigenesis. We performed a meta-analysis of gene expression during the transition from normal prostate (NP) to localized prostate cancer (LPC) (i.e., NP > LPC) and from localized to metastatic prostate cancer (MPC) (i.e., LPC > MPC). We found that HK genes are more likely to be differentially expressed during prostate tumorigenesis than is the average gene in the human genome, suggesting that prostate tumorigenesis is driven by modulation of the expression of HK genes. Cell-cycle genes and proliferation markers were up-regulated in both NP > LPC and LPC > MPC transitions. We also found that the genes encoding ribosomal proteins were up-regulated in the NP > LPC and down-regulated in the LPC > MPC transition. The expression of heat shock proteins was up-regulated during the LPC > MPC transition, suggesting that in its advanced stages, prostate tumor is under cellular stress. The results of these analyses suggest that during prostate tumorigenesis, there is a period when the tumor is under cellular stress and, therefore, may be the most vulnerable and responsive to treatment.
Although preliminary evidence suggests that germline variation in genes involved in steroid hormone metabolism may alter breast cancer prognosis, this has not been systematically evaluated. We examined associations between germline polymorphisms in 6 genes involved in the steroid hormone metabolism and signaling pathway (COMT, CYP19A1, ESR1, PGR, SULT1E1, STS) and survival among women with breast cancer participating in SEARCH, a population-based case-control study. Blood samples from up to 4,470 women were genotyped for 4 possible functional SNPs in CYP19A1 and 106 SNPs tagging the common variation in the remainder of the genes. The genotypes of each polymorphism were tested for association with survival after breast cancer diagnosis using Cox regression analysis. Significant evidence of an association was observed for a COMT polymorphism (rs4818 p = 0.016) under the codominant model. This SNP appeared to fit a dominant model better (HR = 0.80 95% CI: 0.69-0.95, p = 0.009); however, the result was only marginally significant after permutation analysis adjustment for multiple hypothesis tests (p = 0.047). To further evaluate this finding, somatic expression microarray data from 8 publicly available datasets were used to test the association between survival and tumor COMT gene expression; no statistically significant associations were observed. A correlated SNP in COMT, rs4860, has recently been associated with breast cancer prognosis in Chinese women in a dominant model. These results suggest that COMT rs4818, or a variant it tags, is associated with breast cancer prognosis. Further study of COMT and its putative association with breast cancer prognosis is warranted.
Id-1 (inhibitor of differentiation or DNA binding) is a helix-loop-helix protein that is overexpressed in many types of cancer including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We previously reported that ectopic Id-1 expression activates the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT) signaling pathway in human esophageal cancer cells. In this study, we confirmed a positive correlation between Id-1 and phospho-AKT (Ser473) expressions in ESCC cell lines, as well as in ESCC on a tissue microarray. To investigate the significance of Id-1 in esophageal cancer progression, ESCC cells with stable ectopic Id-1 expression were inoculated subcutaneously into the flank of nude mice and were found to form larger tumors that showed elevated Ki-67 proliferation index and increased angiogenesis, as well as reduced apoptosis, compared with control cells expressing the empty vector.The Id-1-overexpressing cells also exhibited enhanced metastatic potential in the experimental metastasis assay. Treatment with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 attenuated the tumor promotion effects of Id-1, indicating that the effects were mediated by the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. In addition, our in vitro experiments showed that ectopic Id-1 expression altered the expression levels of markers associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition and enhanced the migration ability of esophageal cancer cells. The Id-1-overexpressing ESCC cells also exhibited increased invasive potential, which was in part due to PI3K/AKT-dependent modulation of matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression. In conclusion, our results provide the first evidence that Id-1 promotes tumorigenicity and metastasis of human esophageal cancer in vivo and that the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 can attenuate these effects.
It has been suggested that DNA sequence variants of HPV16 contribute to differences in the behavior of individual cervical lesions. To address this question, we have analyzed the association of HPV16 variants with diagnostic severity in 354 HPV16-positive Oklahoman women. HPV16 variant status was determined by PCR amplification and DNA sequencing of the E6 open reading frame. European sequences were identified in 86% of samples and 14% were non-European. Of the 51 non-European cases, 61% were Asian-American, 23% African and 16% were Native American variants. European prototype and related variants were present in comparable numbers (43% each) but the relative proportion of each differed with diagnostic category. In general, the proportion of European variants and non-European variants increased with diagnostic severity while the European prototype decreased. When adjusted for age and race (white, black or Hispanic), the increased risk for carcinoma/severe dysplasia for non-European variants was statistically significant with an odds ratio of 3.8 (1.3-10.7). However, the analogous comparison for the European variants, although also showing increased association with carcinoma/severe dysplasia, did not reach statistical significance (OR = 1.6 (95% CI 0.7-3.6). Overall, HPV16 European sequences (both prototype and related variants), were predominant in Oklahoman women including those with cancers. This suggests that while there appear to be differences among the HPV16-variant categories in risk for progression to invasive cancer, all variant categories are associated with the development of invasive cancer.
P73 plays an important role in modulating cell-cycle control, inducing apoptosis, and inhibiting cell growth. A novel noncoding p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 exon 2 polymorphism was associated with risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). We hypothesized that p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphism modulates risk of second primary malignancies (SPM) in patients after index SCCHN. We followed a cohort of 1,384 patients diagnosed with incident SCCHN between May 1995 and January 2007 for SPM development. Log-rank test and Cox proportional hazard models were used to compare SPM-free survival and SPM risk between the different genotype groups. Our results showed that patients carrying the p73 variant AT allele were less likely to develop SPM compared with the patients with p73 GC/GC genotype (Log-rank test, p = 0.013). Compared with the p73 GC/GC genotype, there was a significantly reduced risk of SPM associated with the p73 GC/AT genotype (HR, 0.61, 95% CI, 0.40-0.93) and the combined p73 GC/AT+AT/AT genotypes (HR, 0.59, 95% CI, 0.39-0.89), but a nonsignificantly reduced risk for p73 AT/AT genotype (HR, 0.44, 95% CI, 0.14-1.41). The p73 AT allele was significantly associated with risk of SPM in an allele dose-response manner (p = 0.011 for trend). The risk of SPM associated with p73 variant genotypes (GC/AT+AT/AT) was more pronounced in several subgroups (e.g., older patients, men, minorities, ever smokers, and ever drinkers). Our results support that this p73 polymorphism may be a marker for risk of SPM among patients with an incident SCCHN.
Experimental and epidemiological evidence suggests that circulating glucose and insulin may play a role in breast carcinogenesis. However, few cohort studies have examined breast cancer risk in association with glucose and insulin levels, and studies to date have had only baseline measurements of exposure. We conducted a longitudinal study of postmenopausal breast cancer risk using the 6% random sample of women in the Women's Health Initiative clinical trials whose fasting blood samples, provided at baseline and at years 1, 3 and 6, were analyzed for glucose and insulin. In addition, a 1% sample of women in the observational study, who had glucose and insulin measured in fasting blood samples drawn at baseline and in year 3, were included in the analysis. We used Cox proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the association of baseline and follow-up measurements of serum glucose and insulin with breast cancer risk. All statistical tests were 2-sided. Among 5,450 women with baseline serum glucose and insulin values, 190 incident cases of breast cancer were ascertained over a median of 8.0 years of follow-up. The highest tertile of baseline insulin, relative to the lowest, was associated with a 2-fold increase in risk in the total population (multivariable hazard ratio 2.22, 95% confidence interval 1.39-3.53) and with a 3-fold increase in risk in women who were not enrolled in the intervention arm of any clinical trial (multivariable hazard ratio 3.15, 95% confidence interval 1.61-6.17). Glucose levels showed no association with risk. Analysis of the repeated measurements supported the results of the baseline analysis. These data suggest that elevated serum insulin levels may be a risk factor for postmenopausal breast cancer.
Infection with cagA-positive Helicobacter pylori is associated with gastric carcinoma. The cagA-encoded CagA protein is delivered into gastric epithelial cells and, upon tyrosine phosphorylation at the C-terminal EPIYA segments, binds and deregulates SHP-2 oncoprotein. On the basis of the differential alignment of the EPIYA segments, CagA can be subdivided into Western CagA, which is produced by H. pylori isolated in Western countries, and East Asian CagA, which is produced by H. pylori circulating in East Asian countries. Western CagA contains EPIYA-A, EPIYA-B and variable numbers of EPIYA-C segments, whereas East Asian CagA contains EPIYA-A, EPIYA-B and variable numbers of EPIYA-D segments. Upon tyrosine phosphorylation, EPIYA-C and EPIYA-D, respectively, serve as low-affinity and high-affinity SHP-2-binding sites. We previously reported that systemic expression of East Asian CagA (CagA-ABDD) induces gastrointestinal and hematopoietic malignancies in mice. In this study, we generated transgenic mice that systemically express Western CagA (CagA-ABCCC), the levels of which are comparable to those in mice expressing East Asian CagA. The mice developed gastric epithelial hypertrophy and gastrointestinal tumors and also showed lymphoid abnormality but not myeloid abnormalities such as granulocytosis and myeloid leukemia found in mice carrying East Asian CagA. The incidence of tumors in mice expressing Western CagA was significantly lower than that in mice expressing East Asian CagA. Our results indicate that Western CagA is qualitatively less oncogenic than East Asian CagA. Differential oncogenic potential of geographically distinct CagA isoforms may contribute to the differential prevalence of gastric carcinoma between East Asian countries and Western countries.
p21-Activated kinase 1 (Pak1), a serine/threonine kinase, has been implicated in cytoskeletal remodelling, cell motility, apoptosis and transformation. However, the role of Pak1 in gastric cancer remains unclear. In this study, we detected Pak1 expression in gastric cancer tissues from 40 patients by western blot. Overexpression of Pak1 was associated with progression, metastasis and prognosis of gastric cancer. In addition, we found that knockdown of Pak1 expression significantly inhibited anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent growth in gastric cancer cells, and markedly inhibited gastric cancer cell xenograft tumor growth. In further study, data showed that Pak1 could regulate the expression of cyclin B1 at the mRNA and protein levels, and impact the subcellular distribution and the promoter activity of cyclin B1. Results from deletion and mutant analysis supplied a new NF-kappaB binding sites at position -321 of cyclin B1 promoter, and indicated that Pak1 regulated the transcription of cyclin B1 in gastric cancer through NF-kappaB. In conclusion, Pak1 may be a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic target in gastric cancer.
Isothiocyanates (ITC) in cruciferous vegetables may be chemopreventive against gastric cancer development. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) may modify the chemopreventive effect of ITC. The relationship between urinary total ITC and risk of gastric cancer was prospectively examined. Between 1986 and 1989, 18,244 middle-aged men in Shanghai, China were enrolled in a prospective study of diet and cancer and donated baseline urine and blood samples. Urinary ITC was quantified for 307 incident cases of gastric cancer that occurred during the first 16 years of follow-up, and 911 matched control subjects. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using logistic regression methods. Seropositivity for antibodies to Helicobacter pylori and homozygous deletions of GSTM1 and GSTT1 were determined. Compared to the first tertile, ORs (95% CIs) of gastric cancer for the second and third tertiles of urinary total ITC were 0.83 (0.61-1.15) and 0.66 (0.47-0.94) (p(trend) = 0.02). A stronger protective effect of ITC against gastric cancer development was seen among men with homozygous deletion of GSTM1 (third tertile versus first tertile, OR = 0.50, 95% CI = 0.27-0.93) or GSTT1 (third tertile vs. first tertile, OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.25-0.88), and particularly with deletions of both GSTM1 and GSTT1 (second and third tertiles vs. first tertile, OR = 0.44, 95% CI = 0.21-0.93). In this cohort of Chinese men at high risk for gastric cancer, isothiocyanates may protect against the development of gastric cancer. The protection may be stronger for individuals genetically deficient in enzymes that metabolize these chemopreventive compounds.
A longitudinal cohort study was conducted in Helicobactor pylori-infected middle-aged Japanese males to evaluate the preventive effects of H. pylori eradication on the development of gastric cancer according to the extent of chronic atrophic gastritis (CAG). The extent of CAG was monitored by baseline serum pepsinogen (PG) levels. We followed 3,656 subjects with persistent H. pylori infection and 473 subjects with successful H. pylori eradication for cancer development for a mean (SD) of 9.3 (0.7) years. Groups with and without extensive CAG were categorized based on PG test-positive criteria to detect extensive CAG of PG I <or= 70 ng/ml and PG I/II ratio <or= 3.0. During the study period, 5 and 55 gastric cancers developed in H. pylori-eradicated and the noneradicated subjects, respectively, indicating no significant reduction in cancer incidence after H. pylori eradication. Among the noneradicated subjects, 1,329 were PG test-positive and 2,327 were PG test-negative. Gastric cancer was confirmed in 30 and 25 subjects, respectively. Among subjects whose infection was eradicated, 155 were PG test-positive and 318 were PG test-negative. Of these subjects, gastric cancer was confirmed in 3 and 2 subjects, respectively. Significant reduction in cancer incidence after eradication was observed only in PG test-negative subjects (p < 0.05; log-rank test). The results of this study strongly indicate that cancer development after eradication depends on the presence of extensive CAG before eradication and that H. pylori eradication is beneficial to most PG test-negative subjects with mild CAG as defined by the aforementioned criteria.
The tumor suppressor role of annexin-A7 (ANXA7) was previously demonstrated by cancer susceptibility in Anxa7(+/-)-mice and by ANXA7 loss in human cancers, especially in hormone-resistant prostate tumors. To gain mechanistic insights into ANXA7 tumor suppression, we undertook an in vitro study in which we compared wild-type (WT)-ANXA7 and dominant-negative (DN)-ANXA7 effects to a conventional tumor suppressor p53 in prostate cancer cells with different androgen sensitivity. Unlike p53 (which caused cell growth arrest and apoptosis to a noticeable extent in benign PrEC), WT-ANXA7 demonstrated profound cytotoxicityin androgen-sensitive LNCaP as well as in the androgen-resistant DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cells, but not in PrEC. In androgen-sensitive LNCaP, WT-ANXA7 decreased low-molecular-weight (LMW) AR protein forms and maintained higher retinoblastoma 1 (RB1)/phospho-RB1 ratio. In contrast, DN-ANXA7 (which lacks phosphatidylserine liposome aggregation properties) increased LMW-AR forms and hyperphosphorylated RB1 that was consistent with the lack of DN-ANXA7 cytotoxicity. According to the microarray-based Ingenuity Pathways Analysis, a major WT-ANXA7 effect in androgen-sensitive LNCaP constituted of upregulation of the RB1-binding transcription factor E2F1 along with its downstream proapoptotic targets such as ASK1 and ASPP2. These results suggested a reversal of the RBdependent repression of the proapoptotic E2F-mediated transcription. However, DN-ANXA7 increased RB1/2 (but not E2F1) expression and induced the proliferation-promoting ERK5, thereby maintaining the RB-dependent repression of E2F-mediated apoptosis in LNcaP. On the other hand, in androgen-resistant cells, WT-ANXA7 tumor suppressor effects involved PTEN and NFkB pathways. Thus, ANXA7 revived the RB-associated cell survival control and overcame androgen resistance and dysfunctional status of major tumor suppressors commonly mutated in prostate cancer. Published 2009 UICC.
Previous epidemiologic studies found inconsistent associations between vegetables and fruit consumption and the risk of bladder cancer. We therefore investigated the association between vegetable and fruit consumption and the risk of bladder cancer among participants of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study. Data on food consumption and complete follow-up for cancer occurrence was available for a total of 478,533 participants, who were recruited in 10 European countries. Estimates of rate ratios were obtained by Cox proportional hazard models, stratified by age at recruitment, gender and study centre, and adjusted for total energy intake, smoking status, duration of smoking and lifetime intensity of smoking. A calibration study in a subsample was used to control for dietary measurement errors. After a mean follow-up of 8.7 years, 1015 participants were newly diagnosed with bladder cancer. Increments of 100 g/day in fruit and vegetable consumption combined did not affect bladder cancer risk (i.e., calibrated HR = 0.98; 95%CI: 0.95-1.01). Borderline statistically significant lower bladder cancer risks were found among never smokers with increased consumption of fruit and vegetables combined (HR = 0.94 95%CI: 0.87-1.00 with increments of 100 g/day; calibrated HR = 0.92 95%CI 0.79-1.06) and increased consumption of apples and pears (hard fruit; calibrated HR = 0.90 95%CI: 0.82-0.98 with increments of 25 g/day). For none of the associations a statistically significant interaction with smoking status was found. Our findings do not support an effect of fruit and vegetable consumption, combined or separately, on bladder cancer risk.
Stage 4 neuroblastoma (NB) is a devastating childhood cancer whose poor outcome has remained essentially unchanged in the last 20 years. Receptor tyrosine kinases have important roles in the control of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of NB cells. Thus, we tested the activity of second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor Dasatinib in human NB cell lines in vitro and in an orthotopic mouse model. Dasatinib inhibited cell viability with an IC(50) in the submicromolar range in 7 of 10 tested cell lines. In sensitive cells, Dasatinib reduced anchorage-independent growth and, in some instances, induced senescence and apoptosis. In HTLA-230 cells, Dasatinib treatment caused down-regulation of c-Kit and c-Src phosphorylation in conjunction with strong inhibition of Erk1/2 and Akt activity. To test the efficacy of Dasatinib in vivo, HTLA-230 and SY5Y cells were orthotopically injected in the adrenal gland of nude mice and drug treatments carried out until day 40. In mice injected with HTLA-230 cells, tumour growth was significantly inhibited at the dose of 30 mg/(kg day) when treatment was started 7 days after injection. In animals injected with SY5Y cells that were exquisitely sensitive in vitro (IC(50)= 92 nM), the antitumour effect of Dasatinib was observed at the dose of 60 mg/(kg day) but only when treatment was started 1 day after injection. However, the anti-tumour effect of Dasatinib in vivo was partial in both orthotopic models, emphasizing the importance of testing candidate new drugs in animal environments closely mimicking the human tumour.
Overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and elevation of its derivative prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) are implicated in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The expression of c-Myc, an oncogenic transcription factor, is also upregulated in this malignant disease. This study sought to elucidate whether a functional connection exists between COX-2/PGE(2) and c-Myc in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Results showed that PGE(2) substantially increased the proliferation of cultured esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells. In this regard, PGE(2) substantially increased the mRNA and protein expression of c-Myc and its association with the binding partner Max. Knockdown of c-Myc by RNA interference also significantly attenuated PGE(2)-induced cell proliferation. Further, mechanistic study revealed that PGE(2) increased the protein stability and nuclear accumulation of c-Myc via phosphorylation on serine 62 in an extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent manner. To this end, ERK activation by PGE(2) was completely abolished by protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors. Moreover, the effect of PGE(2) on c-Myc expression was mimicked by EP2 receptor agonist. In addition, knockdown of EP2 receptor by EP2 siRNA attenuated PGE(2)-induced c-Myc expression. Collectively, our findings suggest that PGE(2) upregulates c-Myc via the EP2/PKC/ERK pathway. This study sheds new light on the carcinogenic mechanism of PGE(2) in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Excellent recommendations exist for studying therapeutic and diagnostic questions. We observe that good guidelines on assessment of evidence for screening questions are currently lacking. Guidelines for diagnostic research (STARD), involving systematic application of the reference test (gold standard) to all subjects of large study populations, are not pertinent in situations of screening for disease that is currently not yet present. A five-step framework is proposed for assessing the potential use of a biomarker as a screening tool for cervical cancer: i) correlation studies establishing a trend between the rate of biomarker expression and severity of neoplasia; ii) diagnostic studies in a clinical setting where all women are submitted to verification by the reference standard; iii) biobank-based studies with assessment in archived cytology samples of the biomarker in cervical cancer cases and controls; iv) prospective cohort studies with baseline assessment of the biomarker and monitoring of disease; v) randomised intervention trials aiming to observe reduced incidence of cancer (or its surrogate, severe dysplasia) in the experimental arm at subsequent screening rounds. The 5-phases framework should guide researchers and test developers in planning assessment of new biomarkers and protect clinicians and stakeholders against premature claims for insufficiently evaluated products.
The mannose-6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (M6P/IGF2R) encodes a protein that plays a critical role in tumor suppression, in part by modulating bioavailability of a potent mitogen, insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2). We tested the hypothesis that the common nonsynonymous genetic variants in M6P/IGF2R c.901C > G (Leu > Val) in exon 6 and c.5002G > A (Gly > Arg) in exon 34 are associated with risk of esophageal and gastric cancers. Study participants in this population-based study comprise 197 controls and 182 cases, including 105 with esophageal-gastric cardia adenocarcinoma (EGA), 57 with noncardia gastric adenocarcinoma and 20 with esophageal squamous (ES) cell carcinoma. Among white males, odds ratios (ORs) were elevated in relation to carrying at least 1 c.901C > G allele for EGA [OR = 1.9; 95% confidence intervals (CIs) = 1.0-3.6] and noncardia gastric cancer (OR = 2.5; 95% CI = 1.2-5.5), but not ES. Exploratory subgroup analyses suggested that associations between EGA and this variant were stronger among irregular or nonusers of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (OR = 2.3; 95% CI = 1.2-4.2) and cigarette smokers (OR = 2.1; 95% CI = 1.0-4.2). An association between carrying the c.5002G > A genotype and EGA was not evident. These findings suggest that nonsynonymous polymorphisms in M6P/IGF2R may contribute to the risks of EGA and noncardia adenocarcinomas. Larger studies are required to confirm these findings.
RhoB, a tumor suppressor, has emerged as an interesting cancer target, and extensive studies aimed at understanding its role in apoptosis have been performed. In our study, we investigated the involvement of RhoB-interacting molecules in apoptosis. To identify RhoB-interacting proteins, we performed yeast-two hybrid screening assays using RhoB as a bait and isolated TNFAIP1, a TNFalpha-induced protein containing the BTB/POZ domain. The interaction between RhoB and TNFAIP1 was demonstrated in vivo through coimmunoprecipitation studies and in vitro binding assays. RFP-TNFAIP1 was found to be partially colocalized with EGFP-RhoB. The partial colocalization of RhoB and TNFAIP1 in endosomes suggests that RhoB-TNFAIP1 interactions may have a functional role in apoptosis. TNFAIP1 elicited proapoptotic activity, while simultaneous expression of RhoB and TNFAIP1 resulted in a dramatic increase in apoptosis in HeLa cells. Furthermore, knockdown of RhoB using siRNA clearly rescued cells from apoptosis induced by TNFAIP1. This finding suggests that interactions between RhoB and TNFAIP1 are crucial for induction of apoptosis in HeLa cells. The observation of increased SAPK/JNK phosphorylation in apoptotic cells and the finding that a JNK inhibitor suppressed apoptosis indicates that SAPK/JNK signaling may be involved in apoptosis induced by RhoB-TNFAIP1 interactions. In conclusion, we found that RhoB interacts with TNFAIP1 to regulate apoptosis via a SAPK/JNK-mediated signal transduction mechanism.
Model-based projections were shown to be useful for deriving most up-to-date population-based cancer survival estimates. However, the performance of these projections, which can be derived by various approaches, has only been evaluated in very few cancer patient populations. Using incidence and follow-up data for 22 common cancers from 9 long-standing population-based cancer registries from diverse parts of Europe, we compared the performance of model-based period and cohort analysis for predicting 5-year relative survival of patients diagnosed in 1996-2000 against standard survival analysis approaches (cohort, complete and period analysis). Overall, model-based predictions provided a best estimate of the later observed actual survival in 135 of 198 occasions, compared to 25, 18 and 33 occasions for cohort, complete and period analysis, respectively. Projections based on cohort and period type modeling performed essentially equally well on average, and their performance was better for more common cancers, in registries with larger population bases, and for cancers subjected to continuous clinical progress and/or ongoing screening efforts. Projections from model-based analysis may contribute to improved timeliness of monitoring of concurrent trends in population-based cancer survival in cancer registries operating in different populations and socioeconomic environments.
Our previous study has suggested that the cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK) is a putative candidate oncogene in glioblastoma tumorigenesis. The potential oncogenic role of CCRK and its clinical/prognostic significance, however, in ovarian carcinoma are unclear. In this study, CCRK expression was examined by immunohistochemistry in a series of ovarian carcinoma tissues. Overexpression of CCRK was detected in 53% of the ovarian carcinomas, and it was positively correlated with an ascending histological grade and/or advanced clinical stage of the disease (p < 0.05). In addition, overexpression of CCRK in ovarian carcinoma was determined to be a strong and an independent predictor of short overall survival (p < 0.05). In ovarian carcinoma cells, CCRK knockdown by RNAi led to a G1 phase cell cycle arrest, while CCRK overexpression by stable transfection of CCRK-containing plasmid pcDNA-CCRK promoted cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. In addition, CCRK knockdown was found to reduce cyclin D1 expression. Consistently, CCRK overexpression increased cyclin D1 expression, and furthermore, a significant correlation between expression of CCRK and cyclin D1 in ovarian carcinomas was observed (p < 0.001). These findings suggest a potential important role of CCRK in the control of cell proliferation via regulation of cyclin D1 expression, and the overexpression of CCRK, as detected by immunohistochemistry, is an independent molecular marker for shortened survival time of patients with ovarian carcinoma.
Endometrial cancer is the most common invasive gynecologic malignancy, yet molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways underlying its etiology and pathophysiology remain poorly characterized. We sought to define a functional role for the protein kinase C (PKC) isoform, PKCalpha, in an established cell model of endometrial adenocarcinoma. Ishikawa cells depleted of PKCalpha protein grew slower, formed fewer colonies in anchorage-independent growth assays and exhibited impaired xenograft tumor formation in nude mice. Consistent with impaired growth, PKCalpha knockdown increased levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors p21(Cip1/WAF1) (p21) and p27(Kip1) (p27). Despite the absence of functional phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) protein in Ishikawa cells, PKCalpha knockdown reduced Akt phosphorylation at serine 473 and concomitantly inhibited phosphorylation of the Akt target, glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta). PKCalpha knockdown also resulted in decreased basal ERK phosphorylation and attenuated ERK activation following EGF stimulation. p21 and p27 expression was not increased by treatment of Ishikawa cells with ERK and Akt inhibitors, suggesting that PKCalpha regulates CDK expression independently of Akt and ERK. Immunohistochemical analysis of Grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma revealed aberrant PKCalpha expression, with foci of elevated PKCalpha staining, not observed in normal endometrium. These studies demonstrate a critical role for PKCalpha signaling in endometrial tumorigenesis by regulating expression of CDK inhibitors p21 and p27 and activation of Akt and ERK-dependent proliferative pathways. Thus, targeting PKCalpha may provide novel therapeutic options in endometrial tumors.
Clofarabine, a next-generation deoxyadenosine analogue, was developed on the basis of experience with cladribine and fludarabine in order to achieve higher efficacy and avoid extramedullary toxicity. During the past decade this is the only drug granted approval for treatment of pediatric acute leukemia. Recent clinical studies have established the efficacy of clofarabine in treating malignancies with a poor prognosis, such as adult, elderly, and relapsed pediatric leukemia. The mechanisms of its anti-cancer activity involve a combination of direct inhibition of DNA synthesis and ribonucleotide reductase and induction of apoptosis. Due to this broad cytotoxicity, this drug is effective against various subtypes of leukemia and is currently being tested as an oral formulation and for combination therapy of both leukemias and solid tumors. In this review we summarize current knowledge pertaining to the molecular mechanisms of action and pharmacological properties of clofarabine, as well as clinical experiences with this drug with the purpose of facilitating the evaluation of its efficacy and the development of future therapies.
Antipsychotics, the drugs used currently for the treatment of schizophrenia, produce their therapeutic effects via the blockade of dopamine receptors. These compounds are, however, limited in their therapeutic efficacy and have side effect liabilities that also limit their use. Agents that produce antipsychotic effects by enhancing NMDA receptor function represent a viable alternative to dopamine antagonists. D-serine, is the prototype of this approach acting as a positive allosteric modulator of the NMDA receptor to enhance antipsychotic efficacy in the clinic. A newer approach to modulating NMDA receptor function, identified by gene association studies, is pLG72/DAOA (D-amino acid oxidase activator) a peptide that modulates D-amino acid oxidase (DAAO) activity, increasing endogenous levels of D-serine. While the initial association of DAOA with schizophrenia and its functional effects on DAAO activity have not been replicated, its identification has led to the development of several DAAO inhibitors, e.g., AS057278, CBIO and Compound 8, that are active in animal models of antipsychotic action. The complications in validating the G72 association with schizoprenia highlight the inherent challenges in translating gene-based, disease-related associations to drug discovery targets.
Female mice with a heterozygous mutation of their dopamine transporter (+/- DAT) showed relatively robust reductions in striatal DAT specific binding (38-50%), while +/- DAT males showed modest reductions (24-32%). Significant decreases in substantia nigra DAT specific binding (42%) and mRNA (24%) were obtained in +/- DAT females, but not +/- DAT males (19% and 5%, respectively). The effects of this DAT perturbation upon vesicular monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT-2) function revealed significantly greater reserpine-evoked DA output from +/+ and +/- DAT female as compared to male mice and the DA output profile differed markedly between +/+ and +/- DAT females, but not males. No changes in VMAT-2 protein or mRNA levels were present among these conditions. On the basis of these data, we propose: (1) a genetic mutation of the DAT does not exert equivalent effects upon the DAT in female and male mice, with females being more affected; (2) an alteration in the DAT may also affect VMAT-2 function; (3) this interaction between DAT and VMAT-2 function is more prevalent in female mice; and (4) the +/- DAT mutation affects VMAT-2 function through an indirect mechanism, that does not involve an alteration in VMAT-2 protein or mRNA. Such DAT/VMAT-2 interactions can be of significance to the gender differences observed in drug addiction and Parkinson's disease.
FOLFOX is a cytostatic drug combination for adjuvant treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) consisting of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin, and oxaliplatin. The mechanism of synergistic interaction of these drugs is poorly understood and little is known concerning the role of drug transporters and the impact of oxaliplatin metabolites oxalate and dichloro-diaminocyclohexane platinum. We therefore investigated the influence of FOLFOX components on drug transporter expression by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and on the efficacy of each FOLFOX component by proliferation assay in the CRC model cell line LS180. Control experiments with transporter over-expressing cell lines were used to assess the significance of important transporters for the cytostatic activity of FOLFOX components. Moreover, we assessed the pharmacological contribution of the oxalato-ligand to the effect of oxaliplatin. FOLFOX components led to several alterations in expression of drug transporters. For instance, 5-FU significantly suppressed ATP7B and human organic cation transporter 2 and increased multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP) 2 mRNA expression (5.8-fold). This was accompanied by a significant sensitisation to oxaliplatin. Over-expression of certain ABC-transporters (BCRP/ABCG2, MRP2/ABCC2 or MRP3/ABCC3) was demonstrated to be beneficial for the efficacy of oxaliplatin. The results obtained indicate that both down- and up-regulations of drug transporters could favour synergistic action of this drug combination. Moreover, oxaliplatin metabolite oxalate seems to positively modulate oxaliplatin's action as elucidated by median effect analysis. In conclusion, we propose as one mechanism for FOLFOX synergism the 5-FU mediated suppression of ATP7B, the over-expression of glutathione exporters such as MRP2/ABCC2 and the decrease of glutathione levels by oxalate.
CXCR4, a G-protein-coupled receptor, which binds the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor 1 alpha (SDF-1alpha, CXCL12), is one of two co-receptors most frequently used by HIV-1 to infect CD4+ lymphocytes. The SDF-1alpha/CXCR4 axis is also involved in angiogenesis, in stem cell homing to bone marrow, in rheumatoid arthritis and in cancer. Here, we directly determined the binding site of the inverse agonist T140 on CXCR4 using photoaffinity labeling. Two T140 photoanalogs were synthesized containing the photoreactive amino acid p-benzoyl-l-phenylalanine (Bpa) in positions 5 or 10, yielding [Bpa(5)]T140 and [Bpa(10)]T140. Binding experiments on HEK293 cells stably expressing the wild-type CXCR4 receptor using 125I-SDF-1alpha demonstrated that T140 and both photoanalogs had affinities in the nanomolar range, similar to SDF-1alpha. Photolabeling led to the formation of specific, covalent 42 kDa T140-CXCR4 complexes. V8 protease digestion of both CXCR4/125I-[Bpa(5)]T140 and CXCR4/125I-[Bpa(10)]T140 adducts generated a fragment of 6kDa suggesting that the T140 photoanalogs labeled a fragment corresponding to Lys(154)-Glu(179) of the receptor's 4th transmembrane domain. Further digestion of this 6kDa fragment with endo Asp-N led to the generation of a shorter fragment validating the photolabeled region. Our results demonstrate that T140 interacts with residues of the fourth transmembrane domain of the CXCR4 receptor and provide new structural constraints enabling us to model the complex between T140 and CXCR4.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes and obesity are metabolic disorders induced by an excessive dietary intake of fat, usually related to inflammation and oxidative stress. AIMS: The aim of the study is to investigate the effect of the antioxidant coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) on hepatic metabolic and inflammatory disorders associated with diet-induced obesity and glucose intolerance. METHODS: C57bl6/j mice were fed for 8 weeks, either a control diet (CT) or a high-fat diet plus 21% fructose in the drinking water (HFF). CoQ10 supplementation was performed in this later condition (HFFQ). RESULTS: HFF mice exhibit increased energy consumption, fat mass development, fasting glycaemia and insulinemia and impaired glucose tolerance. HFF treatment promoted the expression of genes involved in reactive oxygen species production (NADPH oxidase), inflammation (CRP, STAMP2) and metabolism (CPT1alpha) in the liver. CoQ10 supplementation decreased the global hepatic mRNA expression of inflammatory and metabolic stresses markers without changing obesity and tissue lipid peroxides compared to HFF mice. HFF diets paradoxically decreased TBARS (reflecting lipid peroxides) levels in liver, muscle and adipose tissue versus CT group, an effect related to vitamin E content of the diet. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, HFF model promotes glucose intolerance and obesity by a mechanism independent on the level of tissue peroxides. CoQ10 tends to decrease hepatic stress gene expression, independently of any modulation of lipid peroxidation, which is classically considered as its most relevant effect.
This study was aimed at evaluating the potential application of benzophenanthridine alkaloids, sanguinarine and cheleritrine, in the therapy of melanoma cancer. In vitro antiproliferative activity of sanguinarine was higher than that of cheleritrine against the B16 melanoma 4A5 cells. Both agents were able to produce DNA breaks, and the DNA unwinding assay showed that they act as DNA intercalating agents. Sanguinarine was selected for determination of its in vivo preclinical efficacy. Oral treatment with sanguinarine reduced the tumor burden in a transplantable murine tumor grown in a syngeneic host (B16 melanoma 4A5 in C57BL/6 mice), and in a human tumor xenograft grown in immunodeficient mice (A375 human melanoma in athymic nude mice). In A375 tumors a significant decrease in the proliferation marker Ki67, and a reduction in the activated mitogen-activated protein kinases (p-p44/42 MAPK), and in protein kinase B (pAKT) were also observed. Three out of eleven A375-bearing treated mice were tumor-free at the end of treatment, and did not develop any tumor after a further, treatment-free, observation period of 60 days. Sanguinarine also showed a striking antiangiogenic activity in mice. Data from the present study support the concept that sanguinarine can be effective in melanoma skin cancer.
A variety of approaches have been taken to improve the brain penetration of pharmaceutical agents. The amphipathic character of a compound can improve its interaction with the lipid bilayer within cell membranes, and as a result improve permeability. Fatty acid chains or lipoamino acids of various lengths were attached to tranylcypromine (TCP), in an attempt to improve the blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability by increasing the lipophilicity as well as the amphiphatic character of the drug. TCP-FA4, one of the derivatives containing a four carbon alkyl acid chain, showed the greatest improvement in permeability. This molecule was slightly neuroprotective in a beta-amyloid-induced neurodegeneration assay and may also be capable of upregulating brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), as indicated by cell culture assays using human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Since decreased levels of BDNF are observed in many CNS disorders, and direct injection of BDNF is not a viable option due to its poor permeability across the BBB, small molecules capable of regulating BDNF that also cross the BBB may be an interesting treatment option.
The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors are present in animals, plants and fungi and play important roles in the control of cellular proliferation, tissue differentiation, development and detoxification. Although insect genomes contain more than 50 helix-loop-helix transcription factors, the functions of only a few are known. RNAi has become a widely used tool to knock-down the expression to analyze the function of genes. As RNAi works well in Tribolium castaneum, we utilized this insect and RNAi to determine functions of 19 bHLH transcription factors belonging to PAS and HES families during the larval stages of the red flour beetle, T. castaneum. We searched the genome sequence of T. castaneum and identified 53 bHLH genes. Phylogenetic analyses classified these 53 genes into ten families; PAS, HES, Myc/USF, Hand, Mesp, Shout, p48, NeuroD/Neurogenin, Atonal and AS-C. In RNAi studies, knocking-down the expression of seven members of the PAS and HES families affected the growth and development of T. castaneum. An inability to grow to reach critical weight to undergo metamorphosis, failure to complete larval-pupal or pupal-adult ecdysis and abnormal wing development are among the most common phenotypes observed in RNAi insects. Among the bHLH transcription factors studied, the steroid receptor coactivator (SRC) showed the most severe phenotypes. Knock-down in the expression of the gene coding for SRC caused growth arrest by affecting the regulation of lipid metabolism. These studies demonstrate the power of RNAi for functional characterization of members of the multigene families in this model insect.
In this work a detailed analysis of the structure, the expression and the organization of his genes belonging to the core of histidine biosynthesis (hisBHAF) in 40 newly determined and 13 available sequences of Burkholderia strains was carried out. Data obtained revealed a strong conservation of the structure and organization of these genes through the entire genus. The phylogenetic analysis showed the monophyletic origin of this gene cluster and indicated that it did not undergo horizontal gene transfer events. The analysis of the intergenic regions, based on the substitution rate, entropy plot and bendability suggested the existence of a putative transcription promoter upstream of hisB, that was supported by the genetic analysis that showed that this cluster was able to complement Escherichia colihisA, hisB, and hisF mutations. Moreover, a preliminary transcriptional analysis and the analysis of microarray data revealed that the expression of the his core was constitutive. These findings are in agreement with the fact that the entire Burkholderiahis operon is heterogeneous, in that it contains "alien" genes apparently not involved in histidine biosynthesis. Besides, they also support the idea that the proteobacterial his operon was piece-wisely assembled, i.e. through accretion of smaller units containing only some of the genes (eventually together with their own promoters) involved in this biosynthetic route. The correlation existing between the structure, organization and regulation of his "core" genes and the function(s) they perform in cellular metabolism is discussed.
Kynureninase has been described in bacteria, fungi and animals as an enzyme involved in the catabolic degradation pathway of l-tryptophan. This pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of l-kynurenine and 3-hydroxy-l-kynurenine to yield l-alanine and either anthranilic or 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid, respectively. We identified a putative kynureninase gene from a Trypanosoma cruzi project aiming at the structural and functional characterization of more than 100 proteins differentially expressed during metacyclogenesis. This gene encodes a protein similar in size and sequence to kynureninases from other sources. This open reading frame was cloned and the recombinant enzyme was overexpressed. Recombinant T. cruzi kynureninase was purified to homogeneity and its identity was confirmed by mass spectrometry. The apparent molecular mass of the native T. cruzi kynureninase was estimated by gel filtration, suggesting that the protein is a homodimer. Circular dichroism spectrum indicated a mixture of alpha-helix and beta-sheet structure, expected for an aminotransferase fold. l-kynurenine, preferentially hydrolyzed by prokaryotic inducible kynureninases, and 3-hydroxy-l-kynurenine, the preferred substrate in fungi and vertebrates, are both catabolized equally well by T. cruzi kynureninase. Further experimental assays will be performed to fully understand the importance of this enzyme for T. cruzi metabolism.
Aquilegia is an emerging model organism that is phylogenetically intermediate between the core eudicot and monocot models, Arabidopsis and Oryza. In this study, we have used a comparative genomics approach to identify 45 Aquilegia microRNAs that comprise 20 separate plant microRNA families. We have predicted 84 targets of these newly identified Aquilegia microRNAs including transcription factors and loci involved in metabolism, stress responses, transport, and auxin signaling. microRNA families from 16 plant species and the newly identified microRNAs from Aquilegia were analyzed in a phylogenetic context revealing 40 distantly conserved microRNA families. In addition to these highly conserved plant microRNA families, several families with disjointed phylogenetic distribution were identified. This study provides a phylogenetically important dataset for plant microRNA evolution studies. The current study is the first to identify miRNAs in a lower eudicot in which comprehensive genomic resources are becoming available.
There is a lack of fundamental knowledge about the influence of bacteriophage on probiotic bacteria and other commensals in the gut. Here, we present the isolation and morphological and genetic characterization of a virulent narrow-host-range bacteriophage, phiLb338-1. This phage was isolated from fresh sewage and was shown to infect the probiotic cheese strain Lactobacillus paracasei NFBC 338. Electron microscopy studies revealed that phiLb338-1 is a member of the Myoviridae family, with an isometric head, a medium-sized contractile tail, and a complex base plate. Genome sequencing revealed a 142-kb genome with 199 open reading frames. Putative functions could be assigned to 22% of the open reading frames; these had significant homology to genes found in the broad-host-range SPO1-like group of phages which includes the Enterococcus faecalis phage phiEF24C, Listeria phage A511, and Lactobacillus plantarum phage LP65. Interestingly, no significant genomic similarity was observed between the phage and the probiotic host strain. Future studies will determine if the presence of bacteriophage phiLb338-1 or others in the human or animal gut plays an antagonistic role against the probiotic effect of beneficial bacteria.
In this study, we report the expression and genomic structure of the gene encoding human suppressor of cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6), and the characterization of the functional promoter region. The human SOCS6 gene, spanning 40 kb on chromosome 18q22.2, is composed of two exons separated by an intron of 35 kb. Two transcripts are ubiquitously expressed, and both encode the full-length open reading frame of SOCS6. A primer extension assay revealed that the major transcription initiation site is located 469 bp upstream the ATG codon. Luciferase promoter analysis demonstrated that the 5'-flanking region is able to drive transcription, and the CpG-rich sequences near the transcription initiation site are important for the TATA-less SOCS6 promoter activity. Analogous to SOCS1 and SOCS3, which are down-regulated in several human cancers, SOCS6 is expressed at lower levels in carcinomas of stomach and colon. We demonstrated that hypermethylation of the SOCS6 promoter is one of the mechanisms for the epigenetic regulation of SOCS6 expression. Firstly, in vitro methylation of the reporter promoter plasmid significantly suppressed the promoter activity. Secondly, SOCS6 expression in vivo was enhanced by treating cells with a methyltransferase inhibitor. The SOCS6 gene from various species shares significant homology in amino acid sequences, transcription factor binding motifs in promoter regions and the two-exon genomic structure, suggesting that the SOCS6 gene is highly conserved.
Retrotransposons including CR1 (chicken repeat 1) elements are important factors in genome evolution. They also mobilize in a genome in a way that makes them useful for phylogenetic analysis and species identification. This study was designed to identify lineages of CR1 elements in the genomes of forensically important oestroid flies and to further characterize one family, Sbul.CR1B. CR1 fragments from several taxa were amplified, cloned, sequenced and analyzed to identify different lineages of elements. A variety of retrotransposon families were recovered that exhibit similarity to known retrotransposon families. A number of these lineages may have given rise to taxon-specific subfamilies that have been recently active in oestroid fly genomes. One element from Sarcophaga bullata was analyzed in detail to reconstruct a partial Open Reading Frame containing both the reverse transcriptase (RT) and endonuclease (EN) domains. These domains were used to identify conserved amino acid regions in the recovered consensus via comparison to known non-LTR retrotransposons. Phylogenetic analysis of the RT domain revealed the recovered ORF in S. bullata compares favorably with previously documented CR1-like elements. This work will serve as the basis for additional analyses targeted at developing a simple, efficient marker system for the identification of forensically important carrion flies.
Transposable elements comprise a significant part of genomes and are involved in their evolvability. The hobo element is found as an active class II transposable element in Drosophila melanogaster that is able to induce gonadal dysgenesis. Some hobo-related sequences (hRSs) are thought to be relics of old "hobo" invasions, and are therefore ancient genomic constituents. However, some of these hRSs are still mobile. The present study analyzed the expression pattern of hobo and a particular type of hRSs, hobo(VAHS). Both elements were shown to be expressed as sense and antisense mRNA transcripts. Expression analysis in whole mount embryos revealed a pattern similar to that of some developmental regulatory genes. Here we suggest that cis-regulatory sequences similar to those in developmental genes exist in hobo sequences. Therefore, hobo mobilization may contribute to the development of new regulatory networks during genomic evolution.
Ubiquitin (Ub) plays a crucial role in almost every aspect of cellular functions. It is encoded by four genes, of which UbC is known to meet cell demand for ubiquitin in both basal and stressful conditions. To understand the molecular mechanisms regulating UbC gene expression, we performed a functional characterization of the UbC promoter. Deletion analyses on the 5' end of the -916/+878 promoter region, excluded the functional importance of nt -916/-371 in the transcriptional regulation of the gene, while 3' deletions revealed that intron removal (nt+65/+876) resulted in a marked reduction of promoter activity in all the reporter constructs, regardless of the cell types. Intron substitution with a heterologous chimeric intron failed to restore promoter activity, thus allowing to exclude that the splicing event, per se, can be responsible for the intron-mediated burst of transcription. Gel shift assays demonstrated nuclear factor binding with the +137/+766 intron region. Reporter constructs carrying partial intron deletions confirmed that this sequence is, indeed, required for maximal transcriptional activity. Computer-based analysis found potential Sp1 binding motifs within the intron sequence and electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays demonstrated that both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors interact, in vitro, with the UbC intron, at multiple binding sites. Moreover, ectopic expression of Sp1 and Sp3 revealed that both transcription factors positively regulate UbC promoter activity. Collectively, our data highlight the very new evidence that the 5'-UTR intron is crucial in regulating UbC gene expression and provide insights into the pivotal role of Sp1/Sp3 binding to the intronic enhancer in the regulation of UbC transcription.
With the aim of identifying novel genes regulating cartilage development and degeneration, we screened a cartilage-specific expressed sequence tag database. Esophageal cancer related gene 4 (ECRG4) was selected, based on the criteria of 'chondrocyte-specific' and 'unknown function.' ECRG4 expression was particularly abundant in chondrocytes and cartilage, compared to various other mouse tissues. ECRG4 is a secreted protein that undergoes cleavage after secretion. The protein is specifically expressed in chondrocytes in a manner dependent on differentiation status. The expression is very low in mesenchymal cells, and dramatically increased during chondrogenic differentiation. The ECRG4 level in differentiated chondrocytes is decreased during hypertrophic maturation, both in vitro and in vivo, and additionally in dedifferentiating chondrocytes induced by interleukin-1beta or serial subculture, chondrocytes of human osteoarthritic cartilage and experimental mouse osteoarthritic cartilage. However, ectopic expression or exogenous ECRG4 treatment in a primary culture cell system does not affect chondrogenesis of mesenchymal cells, hypertrophic maturation of chondrocytes or dedifferentiation of differentiated chondrocytes. Additionally, cartilage development and organization of extracellular matrix are not affected in transgenic mice overexpressing ECRG4 in cartilage tissue. However, ectopic expression of ECRG4 reduced proliferation of primary culture chondrocytes. While the underlying mechanisms of ECRG4 expression and specific roles remain to be elucidated in more detail, our results support its function as a marker of differentiated articular chondrocytes and cartilage destruction.
Standards for the management of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) in children do presently not exist. Thus a systematic review and summary of the current literature was conducted serving as a basis for the further development of optimal management strategies for childhood GIST within a cooperative network. Presently 21 cases with familial GIST, and more than 100 pediatric cases each with Carney triad or sporadic GIST have been published so far. An international prospective registration based on national registries has recently started to acquire more clinical and molecular data and to develop appropriate management strategies for children and adolescents with GIST.
BACKGROUND: Despite advances in therapy, outcome in many high-grade pediatric central nervous system (CNS) tumors remains poor. The focus of neuro-oncology research has thus turned towards identifying novel therapeutic targets. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) is a DNA repair protein that has been studied in a variety of malignancies and may interfere with therapy-induced DNA damage, however expression in pediatric CNS tumors is unknown. PROCEDURE: We evaluated PARP1 mRNA expression in 81 pediatric CNS tumors using microarray technology. Protein expression was examined by Western blot. RESULTS: PARP1 mRNA is highly expressed in high-grade tumors (P < 0.0001). PARP1 mRNA expression was greater in high-grade glioma than pilocytic astrocytoma (P = 3.5 x 10(-5)) and in large cell medulloblastoma over classic medulloblastoma (P = 0.0053). PARP1 protein was also prominent in high-grade tumors (P = 0.022). CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that PARP1 is expressed in high-grade pediatric CNS tumors, implicating PARP1 inhibition as a potential therapeutic target.
BACKGROUND: Ispinesib is a highly specific inhibitor of kinesin spindle protein (KSP, HsEg5), a mitotic kinesin required for separation of the spindle poles. Here we report the activity of ispinesib against the in vitro and in vivo panels of the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP). PROCEDURES: Ispinesib was tested against the PPTP in vitro panel cell lines at concentrations from 0.1 nM to 1 microM and against the in vivo tumor panel xenografts by intraperitoneal administration (5 or 10 mg/kg) every 4 days for 3 doses repeated at day 21. RESULTS: Ispinesib was highly potent against the PPTP's in vitro cell lines with a median IC(50) of 4.1 nM. Ispinesib (10 mg/kg) induced unexplained toxicity in mice bearing osteosarcoma xenografts and exceeded the MTD in 12 of 40 non-osteosarcoma xenografts. Ispinesib induced significant tumor growth delay in 88% (23/26) of evaluable xenografts. Using a time to event measure of efficacy, ispinesib had intermediate and high levels of activity against 4 (21%) and 5 (26%) of the 19 evaluable solid tumor xenografts, respectively. Ispinesib induced maintained complete responses (CR) in a rhabdoid tumor, a Wilms tumor and a Ewing sarcoma xenograft. Ispinesib (5 mg/kg) produced 2 complete and 2 partial responses among 6 evaluable xenografts in the ALL panel. The in vivo pattern of activity was distinctive from that previously reported for vincristine. CONCLUSIONS: Ispinesib demonstrated broad in vivo antitumor activity, including maintained complete responses for several xenografts, although with high toxicity rates at the doses studied.
Vincristine is one of the most widely used and more effective drugs in paediatric oncology. The dose-limiting toxicity of neuropathy, lack of proven neuroprotective measures and an incomplete understanding of the pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics of vincristine have limited its therapeutic potential. Recent advances in the understanding of vincristine pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics, and potential methods of preventing neurotoxicity are reviewed which could enable dose escalation and dose individualisation in order to enhance the therapeutic index.
EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a well-recognized complication following solid organ transplantation and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) using bone marrow or peripheral blood as stem cell sources, but rarely reported in umbilical cord blood transplantation (UCBT). We report two cases in unrelated UCBT setting and added the following new information to the literature: (i) EBV-related PTLD can be presented late in recipients of unrelated UCBT; (ii) in contrast to reported literatures that PTLD is a serious complication with unfavorable outcome, especially in monomorphic form, our cases showed that the clinical course may be relatively benign if treatment is initiated promptly.
Children who undergo treatment for malignancies are at high for infection with both typical and opportunistic pathogens. Fever in these children prompts extensive evaluation and empiric treatment with broad-spectrum antimicrobials. In the United States (US), tuberculosis is an infrequently reported cause of fever in the pediatric cancer patient and has not been well described. In this report we describe a case of primary pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) in a boy with precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and review the pertinent literature.
BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis and proangiogenic cytokines are involved in neoplastic development. The role of these processes in lymphoma formation has not been established. The aim of the study was to assess angiogenesis on the basis of serum levels of vascular-endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in childhood lymphomas. The prognostic value of these parameters was determined in the examined children. PROCEDURE: Forty-two children with lymphomas (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin Lymphomas) were studied (group A). Group A was divided into two subgroups: A(CR)-30 children with complete remission (CR) and A(PR+P+ER)-12 children with partial remission (PR), progressive disease (P), and early relapse (ER). The control group (group C) consisted of healthy 20 children. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays we quantified VEGF and bFGF in serum of the healthy children and of the children with lymphomas. RESULTS: The serum VEGF concentration in group A was 633.4 pg/ml (24.0-1,210.5) and was significantly higher (P = 0.0001) in comparison with group C (144.6 pg/ml; 32.3-734.8). In subgroup A(PR+P+ER), the baseline serum VEGF concentration was 865.0 pg/ml (205.8-1,209.2) and was significantly higher (P = 0.02) than in subgroup A(CR) (564.0 pg/ml; 24.0-1,210.5). The high serum VEGF concentration in children with lymphomas was the only independent risk factor for treatment failure (OR = 8.64; 95 CI: 1.51-49.34; P = 0.01). The cutoff point for the serum VEGF level >or=633.4 pg/ml as a parameter predicting treatment failure was established (P = 0.01). CONCLUSION: Baseline serum VEGF concentration constitutes a prognostic marker for the progression of Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin Lymphomas in children.
Ovarian tumors have a low incidence in childhood, accounting for 1% of malignancies within the ages of 0-17 years. Small cell carcinoma of the ovary is a rare histology and historically has a poor prognosis. We report a case of an 11-year-old female diagnosed with small cell carcinoma of the ovary and hypercalcemia (SCCOHT). There was a strong family history of the disease, a reduction in the age of onset in the proband, and the absence of BRCA mutations. This case suggests the phenomenon of genetic anticipation in an ovarian cancer.
BACKGROUND: The optimal management of optic pathway gliomas (OPGs) is complicated by their variable natural history, the association with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and difficulties in defining progression and response to treatment. METHODS: This study is a retrospective review of all children presenting to a single institution with an OPG between 1990 and 2004. RESULTS: Of the 133 children included, 78 (59%) had NF1; 87 (71 NF1) were observed initially, of whom 23 (11 NF1) subsequently required treatment. Forty-six patients received immediate treatment. Initial treatment, without or with an observation period, comprised chemotherapy alone (32, 11 NF1); debulking + chemotherapy (15, 4 NF1); gross total resection (6); radiotherapy (2); debulking + radiotherapy (3); and debulking only (12, 3 NF1). Overall, 16 patients were irradiated during the study period. Four children died (overall survival at 5 and 10 years was 97.6% and 94.6% for those who required treatment). Progression-free survival (PFS) for the 69 patients who needed treatment was 48%. There was no difference in PFS between chemotherapy versus chemotherapy + debulking or debulking alone. PFS for the NF1 patients who required treatment was similar to that of non-NF1 patients. Mean follow-up time was 9.0 (range 0.6-18.0, median 8.6) years. CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms the complexity of OPGs and that NF1 is a major determinant of the resultant behavior of the tumor.
A 14-year-old male, who completed chemotherapy following limb salvage surgery for osteosarcoma approximately 2 years ago, was seen for routine follow-up. A CT scan revealed new scattered multifocal nodular lesions. An ultrasonography-guided percutaneous needle biopsy was done to confirm pulmonary metastasis of the underlying osteosarcoma. The lung biopsy showed findings of eosinophilic pneumonia with no evidence of malignancy. Peripheral eosinophilia was also noted. When a more thorough history revealed frequent intake of raw cow liver, we diagnosed pulmonary toxocariasis by ELISA for specific serum IgG antibody.
BACKGROUND: Central adrenal insufficiency is observed after cranial radiation therapy for cancer. Screening at risk patients is recommended, but the best screening strategy is unknown. METHODS: A retrospective review of pediatric cancer survivors who underwent hypothalamic/pituitary/adrenal axis testing was conducted. Data included: cancer diagnosis, radiotherapy dose, other endocrinopathies, and adrenal function testing. Adrenal testing included sequential low-dose corticotropin test (LDCT) and standard-dose corticotropin test (SDCT). 8 a.m. serum cortisol levels were compared to LDCT results. LDCT results were compared by radiotheroapy dose and according to the presence of endocrine comorbidities. RESULTS: Seventy-eight subjects (56% male, mean age at diagnosis 6.5 years) underwent testing. 67.9% had been treated with radiotherapy to the hypothalamus/pituitary. Mean time to diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency was 6.8 years after cancer diagnosis. Adequate adrenal function was found in 65% of patients by LDCT and 89% by SDCT. Only 21% of patients had basal serum cortisols collected at 8 a.m. Agreement between 8 a.m. baseline cortisol and LDCT was fair. Agreement between random baseline cortisol and LDCT was poor. Prevalence of central adrenal insufficiency diagnosed by LDCT increased with radiotherapy dose (8% for 10-19.9 Gy; 83% for >or=40 Gy) and the number of endocrine comorbidities. CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric cancer survivors, central adrenal insufficiency was common even in patients receiving <40 Gy to the hypothalamus/pituitary. We recommend use of LDCT, not 8 a.m. serum cortisol to screen patients who received >30 Gy of radiotherapy and those with other central endocrinopathies.
Frasier syndrome is characterized by a 46 XY disorder of sex development, nephropathy, and increased risk for gonadoblastoma due to Wilms tumor 1(WT1) mutation in the donor splice site of intron-9, resulting in the splice form +KTS. Germ cell tumors and gonadoblastomas have been reported previously in Frasier syndrome. We present the clinical, radiological, and genetic (WT1 mutation analysis) of a 46 XY phenotypic female with Frasier syndrome with bilateral gonadoblastoma with dysgerminoma who developed pilocytic astrocytoma.
BACKGROUND: Within the frame of a twinning programme with Nicaragua, The La Mascota project, we evaluated in our study the contribution of cytogenetic characterization of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) as prognostic factor compared to clinical, morphological, and immunohistochemical parameters. METHODS: All patients with ALL treated at the only cancer pediatric hospital in Nicaragua during 2006 were studied prospectively. Diagnostic immunophenotyping was performed locally and bone marrow or blood samples were sent to the cytogenetic laboratory of Zurich for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis and G-banding. RESULTS: Sixty-six patients with ALL were evaluated. Their mean age at diagnosis was 7.3 years, 31.8% were >or=10 years. Thirty-four patients (51.5%) presented with hyperleucocytosis >or=50 x 10(9)/L, 45 (68.2%) had hepatosplenomegaly. Immunophenotypically 63/66 patients (95%) had a B-precursor, 2 (3%) a T- and 1 (1.5%) a B-mature ALL. FISH analysis demonstrated a TEL/AML1 fusion in 9/66 (14%), BCR/ABL fusion in 1 (1.5%), MLL rearrangement in 2 (3.1%), iAMP21 in 2 (3.1%), MYC rearrangement in 1 (1.5%), and high-hyperdiploidy in 16 (24%). All patients but two with TEL/AML1 fusion and high-hyperdiploidy were clinically and hematologically in the standard risk group whereas those with poor cytogenetic factors had clinical high-risk features and were treated intensively. CONCLUSIONS: Compared to Europe, the ALL population in Nicaragua is older, has a higher proportion of poor prognostic clinical and hematological features and receives more intensive treatment, while patients with TEL/AML1 translocations and high-hyperdiploidy are clinically in the standard risk group. Cytogenetics did not contribute as an additional prognostic factor in this setting.
BACKGROUND: Vincristine (VCR) and actinomycin D (ACD) form the backbone of chemotherapeutic regimens of Wilms tumor treatment. Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) is a potentially life-threatening complication of ACD. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the incidence of VOD after preoperative chemotherapy and assess the effect of dose and frequency of administrating ACD on the occurrence of VOD. METHODS: A single-center retrospective study of patients where liver biopsies were performed after 4 or 8 weeks of preoperative chemotherapy. Patients had localized or metastatic Wilms tumor and were treated according to SIOP 9, 93-1, or 2001 protocol. A correlation was analyzed between histologically confirmed VOD, laboratory parameters, and mode and frequency of ACD administration. Long-term hepatic toxicity was assessed 5 years after the end of therapy. RESULTS: Ninety-one patients were included in this analysis. Forty-one patients (45.1%) had histological evidence of VOD. The incidence of histologically proven VOD was significantly correlated with single administration of 45 microg/kg ACD (SIOP 2001 protocol) as compared to repeated dosing of l5 microg/kg (P = 0.003). Fifty-two percent of all patients had mild-to-severe abnormal liver enzymes 5 years after accomplishing therapy. CONCLUSION: Despite short-course preoperative chemotherapy regimen, patients are at risk of developing histological VOD. This risk is higher when ACD is administered in a 1-day 45 microg/kg regimen as compared to 3 days l5 microg/kg.
We report the case of a 6-year-old male who was referred to a tertiary oncology center with a focal brainstem lesion which was presumed to be neoplastic. Due to the symmetric nature of the lesion on magnetic resonance imaging, the evaluation was expanded to investigate other possible causes and eventual diagnosis of Alexander's disease (AD) was made. AD is a neurodegenerative disease which must be included in the differential for tumor-like lesions within the posterior fossa.
BACKGROUND: The currently used National Cancer Institute (NCI) adverse events criteria for mucosal barrier injury (MBI) are insufficient for use in children. We searched for objective, easily measurable indicators for MBI in children with cancer. PURPOSE: In children with acute myeloid leukemia, various MBI-related clinical and laboratory tests were investigated, reflecting clinical severity (NCI symptomatic adverse events criteria (gold standard), daily gut score (DGS)), inflammation (plasma and fecal interleukin-8 (IL-8), fecal calprotectin), enterocytic loss (plasma citrulline, ratio fecal human DNA/total DNA) and intestinal permeability (sugar absorption tests). RESULTS: Intestinal MBI as detected by the NCI adverse events criteria was found in 55% of chemotherapy cycles, correlating well with the continuous DGS (n = 55, rho = 0.581; P < 0.001). Intestinal cell loss as measured by the ratio fecal human DNA/total DNA and plasma citrulline correlated well with both NCI criteria (n = 61, rho = 0.357, P = 0.005 resp. n = 58, rho = -0.482; P < 0.001) and DGS (n = 54, rho = 0.352, P = 0.009 resp. n = 55, rho = -0.625; P < 0.001). Plasma IL-8 correlated strongly to plasma citrulline (n = 46, rho = -0.627; P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: MBI was reflected by parameters indicating inflammation (IL-8) and cell loss (plasma citrulline, ratio fecal human DNA/total DNA). We conclude that plasma citrulline might be a good parameter for MBI. Further studies are needed to show whether plasma citrulline can be used as a marker for MBI in future research.
BACKGROUND: This retrospective analysis defined and described patterns and predictors of weight change during treatment in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) with high-risk features who received treatment on Children's Cancer Group protocol CCG 1961. PROCEDURE: Patients (1,638) were enrolled in CCG 1961 from November 1996 to May 2002. Weight was measured as BMI percent (%), specific for age and gender, and defined as 100 x ln(BMI/median BMI). RESULTS: By the end of treatment, 23% of children were obese (BMI >or=95%), compared with 14% at diagnosis. Children who received post-induction intensified therapy (arms C, D, SER with Doxorubicin or Idarubicin) had higher gastrointestinal toxicities and lower BMI% from consolidation through interim maintenance 1. BMI% then increased for all arms between delayed intensification and maintenance 1 or 2. Children who were of Black or Hispanic race, obese at diagnosis, or who had grade 3 or 4 pancreatitis/glucose toxicities during induction had higher BMI% throughout treatment. Children were more likely to be obese at the end of the study if they were aged 5-9 years at diagnosis or female gender. Cranial radiation was not a predictor of obesity. CONCLUSIONS: Successful treatment of higher risk childhood ALL was associated with obesity, independent of cranial irradiation. The beginning of maintenance therapy may be the best time to intervene with nutritional and behavioral interventions, particularly for children who are obese or aged 5-9 years at diagnosis, female, Black or Hispanic, or those with metabolic toxicities during induction.
BACKGROUND: Progressive neurodegeneration may result in potentially severe cognitive and motor dysfunctions as a complication of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), a suggested IL-17A-associated inflammatory condition. To detect this complication (CNS-LCH) early and to evaluate the potential efficacy of therapeutic interventions, biomarkers detecting and measuring ongoing neurodegeneration would be valuable. We evaluated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers of ongoing neurodegeneration in CNS-LCH patients. PROCEDURE: Nine patients with endocrine, neuromotor, cognitive or/and behavioral abnormalities as well as neuroradiological evidence of CNS-LCH were evaluated 4-12 years after LCH diagnosis for CSF levels of neurofilament protein light chain (NF-L), glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAp), and total tau protein (TAU). Two patients were analyzed longitudinally. One hundred ten children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) served as controls. RESULTS: NF-L, TAU, and GFAp levels were elevated in four, six, and eight of nine patients studied, respectively. NF-L (P < 0.001) and GFAp (P < 0.001) were higher in patients than in controls (TAU not analyzed in controls). The patient with most severe clinical and neuroradiological CNS-LCH displayed the highest levels of NF-L and GFAp whereas three patients without signs of systemic disease had low TAU levels and normal/slightly elevated NF-L. NF-L tended to be higher at radiological progression of neurodegeneration than at status quo (P = 0.07). Notably, we experienced frequent lumbar puncture complications in these patients. CONCLUSIONS: CSF levels of NF-L, TAU, and GFAp appear to be elevated in CNS-LCH. It would be valuable if these markers were validated in order to serve as markers for early CNS-LCH, to monitor disease progression and to evaluate various treatment attempts for CNS-LCH.
INTRODUCTION: Despite recognition that childhood brain tumor survivors often suffer multiple late effects following therapy, little is known regarding the long-term follow-up (LTFU) programs for these patients. METHODS: A 16-question survey was mailed to member institutions of the Children's Oncology Group in the United States. Institutions were asked about the size of their brain tumor program, activities of the LTFU programs and perceived barriers to follow-up. RESULTS: One hundred forty-five (74%) of 197 institutions returned surveys. Care for patients <21 years old at diagnosis who are >2 years following completion of therapy was provided at a designated neuro-oncology LTFU clinic (31.2%), a general LTFU program for childhood cancer survivors (30.4%), or a general pediatric oncology program (29.7%). Institutions with a neuro-oncology LTFU clinic were more likely to use neuro-psychological testing following radiation therapy (P = 0.001), have longer duration of continued surveillance imaging (P = 0.02), use growth hormone replacement for medulloblastoma survivors (P < 0.001) and continue the use of growth hormone into adulthood (P = 0.05) than those with a general pediatric oncology program. Perceived barriers to care of brain tumor survivors included limited access and lack of insurance (32.1%), lack of funding or dedicated time for providers (22.9%), patients' uncertainty about need to follow-up (20.6%), and patients' desire to not be followed in a pediatric cancer program (12.2%). CONCLUSIONS: Considerable variation exists across institutions in the United States in the delivery of follow-up care for survivors of childhood brain tumors. We encourage additional investigation to better define and implement optimal follow-up care for childhood brain tumor survivors.
BACKGROUND: Children with cancer often mention needle procedures as the most frightening, distressing, and sometimes painful aspect of the disease and treatment. The aim was to investigate whether children experience less fear, distress, and/or pain according to parents, nurses, and children >or=7 years of age when they receive oral midazolam versus placebo before a needle is inserted in a subcutaneously implanted intravenous port. PROCEDURE: Fifty children 1-18 years of age who were being treated in a pediatric oncology and hematology setting were included consecutively when undergoing routine needle insertion into an intravenous port. All children were subjected to one needle insertion in this randomized, triple-blind, placebo-controlled study in which orally administered midazolam (n = 24) 0.3 mg/kg body weight (maximum 10 mg) was compared with placebo (n = 26). Parents, nurses, and children >or=7 years reported the patients' fear, distress, and pain on 0-100 mm Visual Analogue Scales. RESULTS: Fear was lower in the midazolam group according to parents (P = 0.001), nurses (P = 0.001), and children (P = 0.015). Parents and nurses also reported lower distress (P = 0.020 and 0.007, respectively). Post hoc analyses indicated that the effects were more pronounced in younger children (<7 years of age). CONCLUSION: Low-dose oral midazolam was effective in reducing fear and distress in pediatric oncology patients, especially in younger children, undergoing subcutaneous port needle insertion.
BACKGROUND: Our original studies reported an association between the iron-metabolism gene HFE and risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and a birth weight association in ALL. Through its effect on cell proliferation, iron is involved in both fetal development and cancer. We hypothesize that HFE links higher infant birth weight with leukemia risk and that maternal HFE genotype modifies this association. PROCEDURE: Nine hundred ninety-five infants and their mothers from the North Cumbria Community Genetics Project, and 163 incident childhood ALL cases from the Newcastle Haematology Biobank were genotyped for HFE, HAMP, TFRC variants and 21 genomic control loci. Cord blood iron levels were measured in 217 control infants. RESULTS: Three HFE variants showed correlations with birth weight with a gene-dosage relationship in males (gender effect). The association was stronger in homozygotes for TFRC S142G and when the mother was positive for any HFE variant (maternal effect). The genotypes expected to increase fetal iron levels correlated with birth weight in males and their association with ALL was stronger in females who, we postulate, could not offset iron excess by increasing their weight. CONCLUSIONS: Certain materno-fetal genotype combinations that increase fetal iron exposure showed associations with higher birth weight in males and somewhat higher ALL risk in females. Gender-specific use of iron during fetal growth may lead to this dichotomy in birth weight change. Only the materno-fetal genotype combinations that increase iron levels most extremely correlated with birth weight and ALL risk in males.
We present a case of a 14-year-old male with a germline TP53 mutation who presented with synchronous primitive neuroectodermal tumor and choroid plexus carcinoma. Identification of synchronous brain tumors prompted genetic testing for predisposition to malignancy. Within 5 months of presentation, the child developed widely metastatic alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Patient DNA sequencing showed a TP53 allele with a premature stop codon in the oligomerization/nuclear export signal (NES) domain (R342ter). The child's parents, younger brother, paternal grandparents, and maternal grandmother, are without history of malignancy. The patient's brother tested negative for TP53 mutations. This case identifies a rare, de novo, germline TP53 mutation presenting with synchronous CNS malignancies and exhibiting a more fulminant course than typical cases of Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
An asymptomatic 11-week-old male received no treatment after he was classified as having a suspected atypical form of MYCN-nonamplified hyperdiploid stage 4S neuroblastoma (NB), with masses in an adrenal gland, subcutaneous tissues, and the falx cerebri. Within 2 months, however, disease progressed in dura and bone marrow. Two cycles of low-dose chemotherapy achieved a partial response; treatment was discontinued. Complete remission was documented 24 weeks post-cycle 2, and has continued >6 years. The falx cerebri probably does not represent an atypical site for stage 4S NB, but stage 4 NB with favorable biology is sometimes curable with minimal therapy.
Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) of the extremity is not infrequently associated with regional node metastasis. Knowledge of lymphatic drainage of extremity RMSs is important to determine radiotherapy fields. In this report we describe two patients with alveolar RMS of the lower extremity with inguinal metastasis at presentation. Both the distal lower extremity and inguinal region received local therapy consisting of surgery and postoperative radiotherapy. Both patients later developed in-transit lymphatic metastasis outside of the irradiated field. The in-transit lymphatics can be a site of failure in children with alveolar RMS of the extremity and nodal involvement.
BACKGROUND: The first nationwide, population-based study of Swedish pediatric oncologists was conducted in 2006 and it revealed that various aspects of their life satisfaction obviously influenced their stress-resilience. This second part of the study, with a response rate of 89% in the target group, therefore, focused on their life satisfaction and the role of personality, work-related aspects, and emotional distress related to type of medical center and gender. PROCEDURE: This descriptive study was based on a cross-sectional mail survey with questionnaires involving 90 pediatric oncologists. Using hierarchical regression models, their total, present, past, and future life satisfaction was analyzed. RESULTS: The vast majority (76.7%) stated that working in this medical field was very stimulating for their personal development. Male pediatricians were more satisfied with their present lives and physicians working at academic medical centers were more confident about the future. Some oncologists (13.4%), in particular females at non-academic medical centers, needed professional help dealing with work-related psychological problems. Personality trait (Hedonic Capacity) and low levels of depression contributed to every aspect of overall life satisfaction. Work-related aspects influenced present and future life satisfaction. The models explained between 5% and 43% of the variance in life satisfaction in the whole group. CONCLUSIONS: Pediatric oncologists face life-threatening conditions and psychosocial issues factors that may negatively influence their life satisfaction. This study group, a single population of physicians, is characterized by an optimistic attitude and stable emotional status pointing to a high level of satisfaction, which is probably a main basic condition when meeting seriously ill children.
BACKGROUND: Acquired neutropenia is not uncommon in childhood. This study investigated the risk factors associated with developing prolonged acquired neutropenia. PROCEDURE: We reviewed 66,062 hospital admission medical records from the 5-year period January 1, 2002 to December 31, 2006 to identify neutropenic patients, with and without follow-up of their neutropenic course until December 31, 2007. After excluding patients with malignancy, collagen disease, bone marrow failure, prematurity, hereditary disease, congenital neutropenia, immunodeficiency, or status post-liver transplantation, 735 admissions with acquired neutropenia were included in our study. RESULTS: A total of 474 patients with 735 admissions had moderate or severe neutropenia during the 5-year period. Among the 252 acquired neutropenia patients who had follow-up for at least 1 month, 226 patients recovered within 3 months, while 26 patients remained neutropenic after 3 months. Of these 26 patients, 14 recovered after 1 year. An absolute neutrophil count of <500/mm(3) (odds ratio [OR]: 13.66, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.90-64.41), thrombocytosis (OR: 5.76, 95% CI: 1.78-18.58), and age <1 year (OR: 4.93, 95% CI: 1.03-23.54) were associated with prolonged acquired neutropenia, as shown by multivariate logistic regression. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that neutropenia associated with cytomegalovirus (CMV) was more prolonged than neutropenia associated with influenza or Epstein-Barr virus infection. CONCLUSIONS: Prolonged acquired neutropenia was associated with younger age, thrombocytosis, and CMV infection. Neutropenic infants with CMV infection may require antiviral therapy to prevent prolonged acquired neutropenia.
We investigated the effect of subcutaneous anti-D IgG as platelet enhancing therapy in children with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). Twenty-three children were treated with subcutaneous anti-D 50 microg/kg. The median platelet count increased from 7 x 10(9) to 31 x 10(9)/L on day 3 (P < 0.01). The median decline in hemoglobin was 1.3 g/dl. Two children experienced minor fever and chills within 24 hr of treatment. Pain at the injection site was common but self-limiting with no effect on activity level. These results suggest subcutaneous anti-D IgG 50 microg/kg as an effective and well-tolerated treatment option in childhood ITP.
BACKGROUND: Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) with best available donor for children with Philadelphia positive (Ph+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has previously been considered standard practice. Since the introduction of imatinib into the treatment of this disease, the role of allogeneic HCT is more uncertain. PROCEDURE: We investigated the impact of remission status, graft source, and imatinib use on transplant outcomes for 37 children with Ph+ ALL who received an allogeneic HCT at the University of Minnesota between 1990 and 2006. The median age at HCT was 7.47 (range; 1.4-16.4) years. Thirteen patients received imatinib therapy pre- and/or post-HCT (imatinib group) and 24 patients, received either no imatinib (n = 23) or only post-HCT relapse (n = 1) (non-imatinib group). RESULTS: There was no difference in disease-free survival (DFS) or relapse between the imatinib and non-imatinib groups at 3 years (62%/15% vs. 53%/26%; P = 0.99; 0.81, respectively). There was no significant difference in transplant outcomes between matched related donor or unrelated donor (umbilical cord blood or matched unrelated marrow) recipients whereas patients receiving allogeneic HCT in first remission (CR1) had superior DFS and less relapse compared to patients transplanted in >or=CR2 (71%/16% vs. 29%/36%; P = 0.01; P = 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Based on this retrospective analysis at a single institution, the use of imatinib either pre- and/or post-transplant does not appear to significantly impact outcomes for children with Ph+ ALL and allogeneic HCT with the best available donor should be encouraged in CR1.
BACKGROUND: A prospective phase II Histiocyte Society study, LCH-S-98, evaluated the efficacy of 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine (2-CdA) monotherapy as salvage therapy in Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). PROCEDURES: Patients with poor and intermediate risk LCH not responsive to initial therapy and patients with low-risk chronic recurrent LCH were evaluated for response and survival after treatment with 2-6 courses of 2-CdA. RESULTS: Forty-six patients (55%) had involvement of risk organs; lung, liver, spleen, or hematopoetic system (RO+), 37 (45%) were RO-. Twenty-two percent of RO+ patients had a good response while 44% progressed, 62% RO- patients responded, and 11% progressed. Two-year predicted survival is 48% for RO+, 97% for RO- patients, 100% for RO+ patients reactivating in non-risk organs, 67% for RO- patients reactivating in risk organs. Two-year pSU for the entire group is 68%. Seventy-three percent of patients with a poor response to 2-CdA died. Sixty-five percent patients >2 years old and 30% <2 years old survived. There was a median of 26 months from diagnosis to 2-CdA for responders compared to a median of 5 months for non-responders. Twenty-one percent of patients treated <12 months and 57% treated >12 months from diagnosis responded. CONCLUSION: 2-CdA is active in LCH. It produces a higher response rate in patients with low-risk multisystem or multifocal bone disease than those with risk organ involvement. "Risk" patients who fail to respond to 2-CdA have a high mortality. Patient age at 2-CdA therapy and length of time from diagnosis to 2-CdA significantly affect response and survival.
We describe an infant with cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection presenting as transient myeloproliferation resembling juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). The patient fulfilled the international diagnostic criteria of JMML, including hypersensitivity to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Viral studies using serologic assays and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were positive for CMV. Clinical symptoms disappeared and laboratory values returned to normal without specific treatment within 1 year. Follow-up showing a decrease in viral titers suggested CMV infection as an etiologic factor for the development of myeloproliferative features. We conclude that the CMV infection transiently induced abnormal myelopoiesis in this infant.
BACKGROUND: New strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) which frequently carry the Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) genes have been recognized to cause invasive infections in otherwise healthy children and adults. However, the epidemiology of PVL-positive MRSA infections has not been described in children or adults with cancer. PROCEDURE: The epidemiology of MRSA infections in patients with cancer was retrospectively studied from 2000 to 2007. Molecular typing was performed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of the PVL genes. Staphylococcus cassette chromosome (SCC) mec and spa typing was performed on all PVL-positive isolates. RESULTS: A total of 88 MRSA isolates from clinically distinct infectious episodes were collected from 88 patients with cancer during the 8-year study period. Infections were predominant in the skin and soft tissues (SSTI; P = 0.0003). PVL-positive isolates, bearing the type IV SCCmec element, encoding the gene for methicillin resistance, increased significantly during this period (P = 0.043) and comprised 35 of 88 (40%) MRSA isolates. Of these 35 isolates, 32 belonged to spa type 8 and were USA300 genotype. Patients infected with PVL-positive strains did not have more SSTI (P = 0.166) or bacteremia (P = 0.510) as compared to patients with PVL-negative strains. A greater percentage of PVL-positive isolates were susceptible to ciprofloxacin (P = 0.006). CONCLUSIONS: PVL-positive MRSA infections are not associated with a higher morbidity as compared to PVL-negative MRSA infections in children with cancer.
Malignant melanoma is rare in pediatrics, and therapies for patients with disseminated disease have not been well studied. This report describes our experience with the use of high-dose interleukin 2 (aldesleukin, IL-2) in a 2-year-old child with metastatic melanoma and describes our approach for the administration of this agent to young patients.
BACKGROUND: Behavioral and emotional problems in children with sickle cell disease (SCD) may be related to disease factors, or to socio-demographic factors. The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of behavioral and emotional problems in children with SCD living in a Western European country, compared to healthy siblings (who were comparable in age, gender, ethnicity, and socio-economic status-SES), and to a Dutch norm population. METHODS: The Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), Teacher Report Form (TRF) and Disruptive Behavior Disorders rating scale (DBD) were distributed among caregivers and teachers of 119 children with SCD aged 6-18 years and among caregivers and teachers of 38 healthy siblings. RESULTS: Questionnaires were returned by caregivers and/or teachers of 106 children with SCD and 37 healthy siblings. According to caregivers and teachers, children with SCD had more severe internalizing problems than healthy siblings and the norm population. According to teachers, subgroups of both children with SCD and healthy siblings had more severe externalizing problems than the norm population. Children with SCD had more difficulties than healthy siblings in terms of school functioning, showed less competent social behavior and tended to have more attention deficits. CONCLUSIONS: Children with SCD are at increased risk of developing internalizing problems as a result of their disease. Subgroups of children with SCD are at increased risk of developing severe externalizing problems, which may either be related to socio-demographic factors, or to disease factors, such as neurocognitive deficits associated with cerebral infarction.
Invasive fungal infections in immunocompromised children suffering from hematological malignancies have been a major cause of morbidity and mortality. In recent years fungi other than aspergillus and candida are gaining importance. These emerging fungal infections have distinct epidemiological features and management issues especially in immunocompromised patients. Here we report the isolation of Conidiobolus coronatus, a rarely reported zygomycetes infection in a patient suffering from acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Conidiobolus generally causes indolent infection in the sino-respiratory tract. They are known to be angioinvasive and can disseminate. There is no consensus regarding appropriate antifungal treatment for Conidiobolus infection.
Children with Down syndrome (DS) are at increased risk for the development of acute leukemia but they rarely develop other hematologic malignancies or solid tumors. Despite aggressive supportive care, DS patients have increased risk of treatment related morbidity and mortality compared to other children. There are few reported cases of Hodgkin disease in children with DS, and no reported cases of successful therapy for patients with relapsed disease. We report on a child with DS and relapsed Hodgkin disease who was successfully treated with high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplant.
BACKGROUND: Children with cancer in resource limited countries are often malnourished at diagnosis. Acute malnutrition is associated with more infectious complications and an increased risk of morbidity and mortality in major surgery. METHODS: All new patients with the clinical diagnosis of a Wilms tumour admitted in the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital, Blantyre, Malawi from January 2007 until June 2008 were included. We documented anthropometric parameters, tumour size and serum levels of micronutrients at diagnosis. Corrected weight (body weight - tumour weight) was repeated after 4 weeks of preoperative chemotherapy. During therapy oral feeds were encouraged and a locally made ready to use therapeutic peanut butter-based food (chiponde) supplied. RESULTS: A high rate of acute malnutrition was found in patients with Wilms tumour at diagnosis (45-55%), much higher than in community controls (11%). Patients (40%) and community controls (37%) had a similar, high rate of stunting (low height for age), a sign of chronic malnutrition. Tumour size at diagnosis and the degree of acute malnutrition at diagnosis was correlated; patients with a larger tumour had more severe acute malnutrition (r = -0.88, P < 0.01). With a supply of chiponde, 7 of 18 patients had a >5% increase in corrected weight during preoperative chemotherapy. Patients with a more positive nutritional course had a better tumour response to chemotherapy (r = 0.52, P < 0.05). Surprisingly, few micronutrient deficiencies were found, except for low serum levels of vitamin A (44% of patients). CONCLUSION: Acute malnutrition, superimposed on chronic malnutrition, is common in patients with Wilms tumour in Malawi. Earlier presentation needs to be encouraged. Chiponde, a peanut butter based ready-to-use-therapeutic-food, is an attractive means of nutritional support which needs further study.
Involvement of the falx cerebri in infants with stage 4 neuroblastoma is thought to be rare. The falx is derived from the neural crest and thus may be a location for primary neuroblastoma. Its propensity for metastasis is unknown. Management of neuroblastoma in this location is potentially challenging. We describe two children less than 18 months of age who were successfully managed with chemotherapy alone (without radiation or surgery) for falx involvement with neuroblastoma.
PURPOSE: To assess the rate of spinal cord toxicity in adolescents resulting from chemoradiotherapy of parameningeal sarcoma. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Of 152 patients with parameningeal sarcoma treated per the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group protocol from 1977 through 1989, eight developed paralyzing ascending myelitis after intrathecal chemotherapy with cytosine arabinoside, methotrexate, and hydrocortisone administered during and after radiation therapy to volumes that included part of the spinal cord. The eight cases include three not previously published. RESULTS: Of eight patients who developed CNS toxicity after intrathecal chemotherapy and radiotherapy for parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma, all but one were between 13 and 18 years of age when treated. This severe toxicity occurred in one quarter of 28 adolescents treated with the regimen in comparison with one of 123 children 12 years of age or less (P < 0.0001), a rate that was as much as 30 times higher in the adolescents. Lengthening of the spinal cord during the pubertal growth spurt may account for the apparent increased vulnerability. CONCLUSIONS: Chemoradiotoxicity-associated spinal cord injury appears to be more likely to occur in adolescents than in younger or older ages. This observation appears to reverse a conventional wisdom in which the central nervous system is thought to become more resistant to the neurotoxic effects of chemoradiotherapy as it matures.
A multiplex PCR was developed for simultaneous detection of Trypanosoma cruzi DNA and classification of the parasite strain into groups I and II. As little as 10fg of T. cruzi DNA could be detected by multiplex PCR. The technique was shown to be specific for T. cruzi DNA, since no PCR amplification products were obtained with DNA from other tripanosomatid species. Multiplex PCR was validated by assaying genomic DNA from 34 strains of T. cruzi that had been previously characterized; 24 blood samples from experimentally-infected mice and non-infected controls; 20 buffy coat samples from patients in the acute phase of Chagas disease and non-infected individuals, and 15 samples of feces from naturally-infected Triatoma infestans. T. cruzi samples from patients and from Y strain-infected mice were classified by multiplex PCR as T. cruzi II and samples from T. infestans and Colombiana strain-infected mice as T. cruzi I.
The kinetic of maturation (schistogram) of Schistosoma mansoni worms grown in laboratory rats was studied by light and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Infected rats with the BH strain were weekly euthanized 3-9weeks pi. Recovered flukes stained with hydrochloric carmine were preserved as whole-mounts and analyzed by confocal and brightfield microscopy. Worms displayed varying degrees of maturation of the reproductive system at weeks 3-6. Male worms showed complete maturation of the reproductive system at week 6, while female worms completed their maturation at week 7. Males presented few tubercles in tegument in all weeks. Despite the presence of a developing embryo within the ootype, no uterine egg was found. The schistogram in rats follows a pattern similar to that observed in mice hosts.
Effects of essential oil of Allium sativum (garlic) and Piper longum (Indian long pepper) were evaluated on muscular activity of whole Fasciola gigantica and its strip preparation. The whole flukes and longitudinal strip preparations of the flukes were isometrically mounted to record the spontaneous muscular activity (SMA) and to evaluate effects of cumulative doses (0.1, 0.3, 1.0 and 3.0mg/ml) of the plant essential oils. Whole flukes and the strip preparations exhibited continuous SMA without any significant difference in its baseline tension, frequency and amplitude for 2h. Essential oil of A. sativum produced significant reduction in the frequency and the amplitude of the SMA of whole fluke at 1 and 3mg/ml concentrations. It caused complete paralysis of the fluke after 15 min of administration of 3mg/ml concentration. Similar to whole fluke, essential oil of A. sativum (3mg/ml) also produced flaccid paralysis in the strip preparations of the flukes. Essential oil of P. longum firstly induced marked excitatory effect and then there was flaccid paralysis of the whole fluke following 15 min exposure at 3mg/ml concentration. Complete flaccid paralysis of the strip preparation was also ensued after 15 min of administration of 3mg/ml concentration of P. longum. In both the essential oils, the whole fluke and strip preparations did not recover from paralysis following 2-3 washes. In conclusion, the observations demonstrated irreversible paralytic effect of essential oils of A. sativum and P. longum on F. giganticain vitro which might possibly help to developing herbal-based anthelmintic.
Leishmania donovani, causative organism for visceral leishmaniasis, is responsible for considerable mortality and morbidity worldwide. Generation of drug-resistant variants continue to challenge the chemotherapy, the mainstay to fight the disease. The aim of current study was proteomic profiling of wild type (Ld-Wt) and arsenite-resistant (Ld-As20) L. donovani. Significant differences in protein profiles were observed between Ld-As20 and its parent Ld-Wt strain. Proteomic analysis of 158 spots from Ld-Wt and 144 spots from, Ld-As20 identified 77 and 74 protein entries, respectively, through MALDI-TOF/TOF based mass spectrometry and database search. A shift in the isoelectric point of few proteins was observed both in Ld-Wt and Ld-As20, which raises the possibility of continuous arsenite stress, resulting in the differences in the protein profiles of drug-resistant strain from its parent wild type strain. The comparative proteomic data holds the key for elucidation of the multifactorial and complex drug resistance mechanism, like arsenite resistance, in the parasite.
With the aim of investigating the biodistribution of technetium-99m pertechnetate ((99m)TcO4-) in rats infected with Y strain of Tripanosoma Cruzi, at the peak of parasitemia, (14th day of infection), we injected Wistar rats with 0.1 ml of (99m)TcO4- (3.7MBq). After 60 min, the percentage of radioactivity per gram was counted in several isolated organs and blood, using a gamma counter (1470 Wizard, PerkinElmer Finland). The uptake of (99m)TcO4- increased significantly in blood and decreased in the colon of infected animals (p<0.05). A significant reduction in serum iron and red blood cells and a significant increase in total proteins, leukocytes and lymphocytes in the infected rats were observed, compared with controls (p<0.05). A reduction in muscle layer thickness of the colon and mononuclear inflammation were observed. These results conclusively demonstrate that T. cruzi infection would be associated with changes in the biodistribution of (99m)TcO4- and in colon morphology, with potential clinical implications.
RNA polymerase II (pol II) promoters are rare in the African trypanosome Trypanosoma brucei because gene regulation in the parasite is complex and polycistronic. Here, we describe a putative pol II promoter and its structure-function relationship. The promoter has features of an archetypal eukaryotic pol II promoter including putative canonical CCAAT and TATA boxes, and an initiator element. However, the spatial arrangement of these elements is only similar to yeast pol II promoters. Deletion mapping and transcription assays enabled delineation of a minimal promoter that could drive orientation-independent reporter gene expression suggesting that it may be a bidirectional promoter. In vitro transcription in a heterologous nuclear extract revealed that the promoter can be recognized by the basal eukaryotic transcription complex. This suggests that the transcription machinery in the parasite may be very similar to those of other eukaryotes.
Giardia duodenalis is a waterborne protozoan parasite that causes the diarrhoeal disease, giardiasis. Its durable and thick cell wall allows the parasite to exhibit resistance to environmental stresses. Because G. duodenalis exists in a water system at low levels, it is necessary to develop a sensitive method to detect its viability in aquatic environments. In the present study, specific primers for the heat shock protein (hsp) 70 gene were designed on the basis of G. duodenalis genome sequence and bioinformatic analysis. Viable G. duodenalis cysts were successfully distinguished by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis using these primers. The amplicon of hsp70 was obtained from one cyst of G. duodenalis/100 microl, and this detection sensitivity significantly increased by 10(3)-fold when the cysts were given heat shock treatment. These findings prove that viable G. duodenalis cysts were successfully detected with a high degree of sensitivity by RT-PCR analysis targeting the hsp70 gene of G. duodenalis, thereby suggesting its practical potential for detecting viable G. duodenalis in environmental samples.
We have cloned and expressed calmodulin (CaM) from Trypanosoma cruzi, for the first time, to obtain large amounts of protein. CaM is a very well conserved protein throughout evolution, sharing 100% amino acid sequence identity between different vertebrates and 99% between trypanosomatids. However, there is 89% amino acid sequence identity between T. cruzi and vertebrate CaMs. The results demonstrate significant differences between calmodulin from T. cruzi and mammals. First, a polyclonal antibody developed in an egg-yolk system to the T. cruzi CaM recognizes the autologous CaM but not the CaM from rat. Second, it undergoes a larger increase in the alpha-helix content upon binding with Ca(2+), when compared to CaM from vertebrates. Finally, two classic CaM antagonists, calmidazolium and trifluoperazine, capable of inhibiting the action of CaM in mammals when assayed on the plasma membrane Ca(2+) pump, showed a significant loss of activity when assayed upon stimulation with the T. cruzi CaM.
Infections with the parasitic helminth, Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, cause changes in rat small intestinal goblet cell mucin, particularly in the peripheral sugar residues of oligosaccharide. These changes may correlate with expulsion. In this study, we examined changes in mucin oligosaccharides caused by primary infection and reinfection with N. brasiliensis, using two monoclonal antibodies, HCM31 and PGM34, that react with sialomucin and sulfomucin, respectively. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of jejunal mucins showed that the relative reactivity of mucins with HCM31, but not PGM34, increased up to 16 days after primary infection and 6 days after reinfection, the times when the worms were expelled from the rats. Immunohistochemical studies confirmed that goblet cells stained with HCM31 greatly increased at the time of worm expulsion. These results indicate that the marked increase observed in HCM31-reactive sialomucins may be related to expulsion of the worms.
In recent studies, heterologous prime-boost approaches, employing plasmid DNA and viral vector pathogen-delivering sequences, have been considered an effective protection strategy for intracellular parasite infections. Here, we evaluated the efficacy of such a strategy against the canine Babesia gibsoni infection. The DNA (pCAGGS-P29) and recombinant vaccinia virus (vvP29) both encoding the P29 of B. gibsoni were used in this study. The dogs were immunized 3 times with priming DNA and boosted once with recombinant virus. The dogs immunized with P29 developed a significant level of IgG2 antibody against P29. The response was strongly boosted by the inoculation of vvP29. The peripheral IFN-gamma responses of the dogs immunized with P29 were significantly higher than those of controls after the parasite inoculation. Moreover, the P29 immunized group showed a significantly low level of parasitemia. In conclusion, this study supports the efficacy of a prime-boost strategy for dogs against canine B. gibsoni infection.
A Real-time quantitative PCR assay to quantify the Toxoplasma gondii apicoplast was studied. Primers were designed to amplify a 305bp product specific to T. gondii apicoplast. Standard curves were generated for both T. gondii apicoplast DNA and genomic DNA, and were used to compute the relative concentration of apicoplast DNA copies in the test samples. The results indicated that the copies of T. gondii apicoplast DNA was significantly low when exposed to ciprofloxacin, clindamycin and azithromycin for 48h in the second infectious cycle. Our study shows that the Real-time PCR technique is a simple and quick technique for screening the anti-apicoplast drugs.
Two recombinant barley cystatins, HvCPI5 and HvCPI6, have been tested in vitro against promastigotes and intracellular amastigotes of Leishmania infantum in the J774 monocytic cell line. Toxicity of cystatins for J774 cells was also determined. In addition, a comparison between direct counts of intracellular amastigotes and quantitation of burden by Q-PCR was carried out. Low concentrations (2 microM) from both cystatins were unable to inhibit promastigote replication. HvCPI5 was toxic for mammalian cells; 0.1 microM reduced by more than 50% the cell viability. On the contrary, HvCPI6 did not exhibit any toxicity for J774 cells up to 6 microM and inhibited the intracellular amastigote multiplication. Dose-response analysis showed that 4.8 microM HvCPI6 reduced by >90% the intracellular parasite load and had an approximate IC(50) value of 1.5 microM. Comparable results were obtained by direct counting of intracellular amastigotes and Q-PCR. Results point towards the direct inhibition of amastigote multiplication by HvCPI6 and the interest of this recombinant cystatin in the chemotherapy of leishmaniasis.
The newborn larval stage of Trichinella spiralis enters the host striated skeletal muscle cell resulting in the formation of the nurse cell. Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) was detected in cells in the area immediately surrounding the nurse cells. However, no data are available on the antigens involved, the role of other angiogenic factors or the relationship of angiogenesis with Nitric Oxide (NO) production. Using macrophage cell culture we study the effect of different Trichinella L1 antigens from one encapsulated (T. spiralis) and one non-encapsulated (Trichinellapseudospiralis) on the expression of VEGF and basic Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF2). Also, we investigate the relationship between the production of NO and angiogenic mediators. The results show that encapsulated and non-encapsulated Trichinella species are different in their capacity to stimulate the expression of VEGF and FGF2 from host macrophages. Finally, there is no relationship between angiogenic factors and NO production by T. spiralis antigen.
A monoclonal antibody (MoAb)-based sandwich ELISA was developed for the detection of circulating 28.5 kDa tegumental antigen (28.5 kDa TA) in the sera from mice experimentally infected with Fasciola gigantica. The MoAb was immobilized on a microtiter plate, and the antigen in the serum was captured and detected with biotinylated polyclonal rabbit anti TA antibody. The test could detect 28.5 kDa in the extracts of tegument (TA), whole body (WB) and excretory-secretory (ES) fractions at the concentrations of these crude antigens as low as 600 pg/ml, 16 and 60 ng/ml, respectively. This sandwich ELISA assay could detect the infection from day 1 to 35 post infection and showed that circulating level of 28.5 kDa TA peaked at day 1 post infection. In contrast, the antibody detection by indirect ELISA could only demonstrate the antibody level from 35 days post infection. The reliability of the assay method was evaluated using sera from mice infected with F. gigantica or Schistosoma mansoni, and hamsters infected with Opisthorchis viverrini, as well as healthy mice and hamsters. The sandwich ELISA exhibited a sensitivity and specificity at 94.55% and 100%, respectively, and with a positive predictive value of 100%, a negative predictive value of 97.39%, false positive rate of 0%, false negative rate of 5.50% and an accuracy of 98.2%. Thus, this detection method exhibited high specificity and sensitivity as well as could be used for early diagnosis of fasciolosis by F. gigantica.
Ribosomal RNA sequences (361 or 362bp) of the second internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS-2) and a portion of mitochondrial cox1 (423bp) for Fasciola spp. obtained from specimens collected in indigenous and hybrid goats and sheep in Vietnam were characterized for genotypic status and hybridization/introgression. Alignment of 48 ITS-2 sequences (also those from goats and sheep in this study) indicates that F. gigantica and F. hepatica differ typically from each other at seven sites whereas one of these is a distinguishing deletion (T) at the 327th position in F. gigantica relative to F. hepatica. The isolates from the mountainous goats in the North of Vietnam (Yen Bai province) showed the ITS-2 composition relatively identical to that of F. hepatica. The ITS-2 sequences from populations of Fasciola isolates in goats had probably experienced introgression/hybridization as reported previously in other ruminants and humans. All Vietnamese goat-of-origin specimens had high pairwise percentage of mitochondrial cox1 sequences to F. gigantica (97-100%), and very low identity to F. hepatica (91-93%), suggesting their maternal linkage to be traced to F. gigantica. The presence of hybrid and/or introgressed populations of liver flukes bearing genetic material from both F. hepatica and F. gigantica in the goats/sheep in Vietnam, regardless of indigenous or imported hosts, appears to be the first demonstration from a tropical country.
Membrane lipid rafts have been implicated in erythrocyte invasion process by Plasmodium falciparum. In this study, we examined the effect of lidocaine, a local anesthetic, which disrupts lipid rafts reversibly without affecting membrane cholesterol content on parasite invasion. In the presence of increasing concentrations of lidocaine in the culture medium, parasite invasion was progressively decreased with complete inhibition at 2mM. Decreased invasion was also seen in erythrocytes pre-treated with lidocaine and cultured in the absence of lidocaine. This inhibitory effect on parasite invasion was reversed following removal of lidocaine from erythrocyte membranes. Our findings show that disruption of lipid rafts in the context of normal cholesterol content markedly inhibits parasite invasion and confirm an important role for lipid rafts in invasion of erythrocytes by P. falciparum.
This study describes the first days of Taenia crassiceps infection in BALB/c substrains, BALB/cAnN and BALB/cJ, using two stocks of the same strains which were kept in different animal facilities, conventional and pathogen-free conditions, respectively. This study shows that parasite growth restriction shown by conventional BALB/cJ mice changed to parasite growth permissiveness when pathogen-free BALB/cJ mice were used. In addition, the higher number of macrophages, NK cells and intraperitoneal level of IFN-gamma found in the conventional restrictive BALB/cJ substrain vanished when the permissiveness to the parasite growth increased. No differences were found in DNA sequences of parasites collected before and after the change in the permissiveness to parasite growth which favors the possibility that the observed modifications could be due to changes in the murine strains and/or their maintenance conditions.
This article uses philosophical inquiry to present the relationship between the helping role in nursing and the concept of trust essential to it. It characterizes helping as the moral center of the nurse-patient relationship and discusses how patients' expectations of help and caring create obligations of trustworthiness on the part of the nurse. It uses literature from various disciplines to examine different theoretical accounts of trust, each presenting important features of trust relationships that apply to health care professionals, patients, and families. Exploring the concept of trust, and the key leverage points that elicit it, develops a thesis that nurses can improve their understanding of the principal attributes and the conditions that foster or impede trust. The article concludes that trust is the core moral ingredient of helping relationships. Trust as a moral value is even more basic than duties of beneficence, respect, veracity, and autonomy. Trust is the confident expectation that others can be relied upon to act with good will and to secure what is best for the person seeking help.
The moral practice of nursing requires the difficult work of discerning the best response to an ethical quandary. Determining the right course of action can rarely be discovered by assuming that one value, one theory, one point of view will always and reliably identify the morality of an action. Thus, the role of a nurse is an inherently moral activity that is at the heart and soul of health care. Practitioners who move too quickly to a state of moral certainty about a decision may be missing essential components of the enactment of moral agency. Personal integrity and professional integrity, patient interests, society's expectation of a profession, the balance between rights and obligations within the nurse-patient relationship, acting according to one's conscience, power, control, and moral certainty are a few of the topics that enrich thinking about the moral richness of nursing practice, and will encourage readers to know, to reason, and to act in ways that demonstrate reflective moral judgment.
Nursing is widely considered as an art and a science, wherein caring forms the theoretical framework of nursing. Nursing and caring are grounded in a relational understanding, unity, and connection between the professional nurse and the patient. Task-oriented approaches challenge nurses in keeping care in nursing. This challenge is ongoing as professional nurses strive to maintain the concept, art, and act of caring as the moral center of the nursing profession. Keeping the care in nursing involves the application of art and science through theoretical concepts, scientific research, conscious commitment to the art of caring as an identity of nursing, and purposeful efforts to include caring behaviors during each nurse-patient interaction. This article discusses the profession of nursing as an art and a science, and it explores the challenges associated with keeping the care in nursing.
The therapeutic nature of the nurse-patient relationship is grounded in an ethic of caring. Florence Nightingale envisioned nursing as an art and a science...a blending of humanistic, caring presence with evidence-based knowledge and exquisite skill. In this article, the author explores the caring practice of nursing as a framework for understanding moral accountability and integrity in practice. Being morally accountable and responsible for one's judgment and actions is central to the nurse's role as a moral agent. Nurses who practice with moral integrity possess a strong sense of themselves and act in ways consistent with what they understand is the right thing to do. A review of the literature related to caring theory, the concepts of moral accountability and integrity, and the documents that speak of these values and concepts in professional practice (eg, Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements, Nursing's Social Policy Statement) are presented in this article.
The Human Genome Project will change how health is defined and how disease is prevented, diagnosed, and treated. As the largest group of health care providers in contact with patients, nurses need to be competent in the science of genetics. Beyond this, nurses need to understand the complexities that arise in genomic health care. Ethical, legal, and social issues are integral to the delivery of genomic health care, and nurses must have an astute understanding of such complexities. What it means to know, to reason, and to act in this postgenomic age is explored.
This article addresses nursing presence, a phenomenon essential to holistic nursing care. The concept is introduced and explained, supporting background information is reviewed, barriers are identified, and successful applications are illustrated in different clinical settings. Avowing that metaphysical knowledge is the underpinning to the art of nursing presence, a Transformative Nursing Presence Model is offered as a distinctive framework for nurses and organizations interested in fostering enhanced nursing presence.
This article discusses delegation challenges and legal and regulatory oversight associated with delegation in the clinical practice setting. The authors address moral and legal attributes of the roles and responsibilities of health care providers regarding delegating health care interventions. The article also explores guiding principles and rules of delegation within professional standards, national practice guidelines, and state nurse practice acts. Nurse experts provide thoughtful reflection on nursing models and the role of delegation, emphasizing the critical role of delegation in extending the role of the health care professional in patient care services.
Clinical research is a systematic investigation of human biology, health, or illness involving human beings. It builds on laboratory and animal studies and often involves clinical trials, which are specifically designed to test the safety and efficacy of interventions in humans. Nurses are critical to the conduct of ethical clinical research and face clinical, ethical, and regulatory challenges in research in many diverse roles. Understanding and addressing the ethical challenges that complicate clinical research is integral to upholding the moral commitment that nurses make to patients, including protecting their rights and ensuring their safety as patients and as research participants.
During the past century, nurses have served as caregivers for United States military personnel in every major theater of war. Military nurses in the war zone deliver patient care while working in austere conditions, and are under constant threat of personal danger. This article gives a historical overview of the role of nurses in war zones, followed by a review from the perspectives of environment, safety, the nature of injuries, and treatment of military personnel and civilians.
Culture has been defined as the thoughts, communications, actions, customs, beliefs, values, and institutions of racial, ethnic, religious, or social groups. A culture of nursing refers to the learned and transmitted lifeways, values, symbols, patterns, and normative practices of members of the nursing profession of a particular society. To serve the unique and diverse needs of patients in the United States, it is imperative that nurses understand the importance of cultural differences by valuing, incorporating, and examining their own health-related values and beliefs and those of their health care organizations, for only then can they support the principle of respect for persons and the ideal of transcultural care.
The withdrawal, withholding, or implementation of life-sustaining treatments such as artificial nutrition and hydration challenge nurses on a daily basis. To meet these challenges, nurses need the composite skills of moral and ethical discernment, practical wisdom and a knowledge base that justifies reasoning and actions that support patient and family decision making. Nurses' moral knowledge develops through experiential learning, didactic learning, and deliberation of ethical principles that merge with moral intuition, ethical codes, and moral theories. Only when a nurse becomes skilled and confident in gathering empiric and ethical knowledge can he or she fully act as a moral agent in assisting families faced with making highly emotional decisions regarding the provision, withholding, or withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration.
The influence of religious beliefs and practices at the end of life is underinvestigated. Given nursing's advocacy role and the intimate and personal nature of the dimensions of religiosity and the end of life, exploring the multidimensional interplay of religiosity and end-of-life care is a significant aspect of the nurse-patient relationship and must be better understood. The question that must be faced is whether nurses' own belief systems impinge on or influence patient care, especially for patients who are at the end of life. When nurses understand their own beliefs and respect the religious practices and needs of patients and their families, it deepens the humanistic dimensions of the nurse-patient relationship.
Toxicity and persistence of fumonisin B1 (FB1) in liver, kidney and muscle were investigated in ducks fed 5, 10 and 20mg FB1+FB2/kg feed during force-feeding. Mortality and signs of toxicity were only obtained with 20mg/kg, whereas an increased Sa/So ratio was observed from 5mg/kg on. Persistence of FB1 was only found in liver (16 and 20 microg FB1/kg liver in ducks fed 10 and 20 mg FB1+FB2/kg feed, respectively). Toxicokinetic studies were conducted by the intravenous route (IV, single dose: 10mg FB1/kg body weight) and the oral route (single dose: 100mg FB1/kg body weight), in growing ducks and in ducks during force-feeding. After IV administration, serum concentration-time curves were described by a two-compartment open model. Elimination half-life and mean residence time of FB1 were 26 and 24 min, respectively, clearance was 19.3 ml/min/kg. After oral administration, bioavailability, elimination half-life, mean residence time and clearance varied during force-feeding and growth from 2-2.3%, 71-80 min, 200-188 min, 16.7-17 ml/min/kg, respectively. Taken together these results demonstrate that the risk of persistence of FB1 in ducks after force-feeding is very low, Sa/So being a good biomarker which increases before signs of toxicity and risk of persistence of FB1 in tissue (limit of detection 13 microg/kg).
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that mediates the effects of aromatic hydrocarbons, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene (MC); the prototypical response is induction of drug-metabolizing enzymes. Factors that regulate AHR levels in vivo are poorly understood and it is also not clear how AHR levels affect aromatic hydrocarbon responsiveness. Our interest in pituitary-dependent regulation of AHR levels was prompted by two findings from our laboratory: (1) hypophysectomized rats have reduced hepatic levels of AHR protein; and (2) glucocorticoids increase AHR expression and aromatic hydrocarbon responsiveness in rodent hepatoma cells. To study whether adrenalectomy and glucocorticoids contribute to hormone-dependent regulation of the hepatic AHR pathway, male adrenalectomized (ADX) or SHAM-ADX rats were treated with dexamethasone (DEX) or vehicle. AHR protein was depleted by 50-60% at 4 days after ADX, but was not altered by DEX treatment. To assess whether the observed AHR depletion affected aromatic hydrocarbon responsiveness, the induction of hepatic cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) mRNA by MC was measured as an AHR-mediated adaptive response. MC-induced hepatic CYP1B1 mRNA was reduced by 50% in ADX rats relative to SHAM-ADX. Exogenous glucocorticoid treatment (DEX - 1.5mg/kg) induced hepatic AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA by up to 9-fold at 3 and 6h after dosing, with no corresponding change in ARNT protein levels. These data demonstrate that: (1) adrenal-dependent factors contribute to the physiological maintenance of hepatic AHR protein levels; (2) the depletion of hepatic AHR protein in ADX rats coincided with a diminished adaptive response to MC; and (3) exogenous glucocorticoid treatment increases hepatic ARNT mRNA levels regardless of adrenal status. This model is useful for studying the mechanisms of AHR and ARNT regulation and for further characterization of the impact of AHR protein depletion on the response to aromatic hydrocarbons in vivo.
We examined whether nitric oxide (NO) in vivo could induce interscapular brown adipose tissue (IBAT) glutathione synthesis. Data show that NO induces in vivo IBAT glutathione synthesis through activation of glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL) mRNA and protein expression. This NO effect appeared to be mediated by nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation. We have also observed a complex series of in vivo cellular responses during chronic inhibition of NO synthesis, suggesting that regulatory pathways unrelated to GCL alteration underlie glutathione level increase induced by N(omega)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-NAME). In general, glutathione synthesis in IBAT seemed to be finely tuned by NO to provide glutathione for either mediating the effects of NO, or for preventing potential nitrosative stress.
Hepatic fibrosis is a major complication of various chronic liver diseases. Activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) play a critical role in the development of liver fibrosis and the axis of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)/PDGF receptor (PDGFR), a member of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), is closely associated with the activation of HSC. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 receptor (IGF-1R), which also belongs to RTKs, interacts with the PDGF/PDGFR axis, thereby cooperatively promoting hepatic fibrosis. We herein examined the effects of (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which inhibits the activation of several types of RTKs, on the development of rat liver fibrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). Drinking water with 0.1% EGCG significantly decreased the serum levels of both aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase raised by CCl4, thus indicating an improvement of liver injury. In CCl4-injected rats, EGCG markedly attenuated hepatic fibrosis and decreased the amount of hydroxyproline in the experimental liver. The expression of PDGFRbeta and IGF-1R mRNAs in the liver was significantly lowered by the treatment with EGCG. EGCG also decreased the expression of PDGFRbeta and alpha-smooth muscle actin proteins, thus indicating the inhibition of HSC activation. These findings suggest that EGCG can exert, at least in part, an anti-fibrotic effect on the liver by targeting PDGFRbeta and IGF-1R. EGCG might therefore be useful in both the prevention and treatment of hepatic fibrosis.
Comparative studies on free radical scavenging by isomers of hydroxybenzyl alcohols (HBAs) were carried out to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the antioxidant action. Using rat liver mitochondria as model systems, we have examined the radioprotective and antioxidant effects of hydroxybenzyl alcohols. Apart from their ability to scavenge free radicals and ferric reducing power, HBAs have shown good protection against radiation and oxidative stress. Using peroxyl radicals as initiator of reactive oxygen species (ROS), studies were carried out to evaluate antioxidant properties of HBAs against rat liver mitochondrial membrane components such as lipid and protein. Our results show that HBAs are potent inhibitor of lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation thus suggesting their role as free radical scavengers. In the presence of HBAs, restoration of depleted activity of Mn-SOD has also been investigated. In the presence of 2-hydroxybenzyl alcohol (2-HBA) complete restoration in the activity of Mn-SOD was observed on exposure to 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride (AAPH). Free radical scavenging ability of HBAs were found to be comparable to alpha tocopherol. Pulse radiolysis technique has been used to study the reactions of HBAs with various biologically relevant reactive species such as hydroxyl radical (OH) and trichloromethyl peroxyl radical (CCl3O2). HBAs could scavenge OH radical giving initially OH-adducts which in turn decays to phenoxyl radicals. Reactions of phenoxyl radicals of HBAs with ascorbic acid have been also studied. Redox potential of HBAs has been evaluated with cyclic voltammetry. Studies clearly suggest a structural reactivity correlation between radical scavenging and antioxidant properties of these isomers of HBA. Among the 3 isomers of HBAs, 4-HBA and 2-HBA are found to have better radical scavenging and antioxidant properties than 3-HBA.
Fetal exposure of mice to arsenic and subsequent postnatal diethylstilbestrol (DES) facilitates production of urogenital system and liver tumors in the offspring when they reach adulthood. The adrenal is a target of endocrine disruption that could influence tumor formation at other sites. Thus, we examined possible fetal arsenic-induced adrenal effects as a potential basis of arsenic enhancement of DES carcinogenesis. Pregnant CD1 mice were given drinking water containing 85 ppm arsenic as sodium arsenite or unaltered water from day 8 to day 18 of gestation and were allowed to deliver normally. Groups of offspring were subsequently injected s.c. on postpartum days 1-5 with DES (2 microg/pup/day) and killed on postnatal day 12. Total RNA was isolated from the whole adrenal glands, and the expression of various genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR. Fetal arsenic exposure greatly enhanced DES-induced, estrogen-linked gene expression, such as estrogen receptor-alpha and trefoil factors. Expression of genes involved with steroid metabolism and/or methionine metabolism was also increased, including genes encoding for 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 5 (HSD17beta5) and androstenedione 15alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp2a4). The transcripts for homocysteine cycling genes (betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase and thioether S-methyltransferase) and developmental marker genes (alpha-fetoprotein, insulin-like growth factor 2 and IGF binding protein-1), were also higher with arsenic plus DES than either treatment alone. Thus, exposure of the mouse to arsenic during a critical period of fetal development may potentially alter adrenal genetic programming, leading to endocrine disruption and potentially enhancing tumor formation together with DES at other sites much later in life. Functional studies, such as changes in circulating steroids, would greatly support this hypothesis, and are planned.
Celecoxib is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) developed as a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Despite the associated cardiovascular toxicity risk, celecoxib has been found to be effective in reducing cancer risk in animal and human studies. In the present study the antiproliferative activity of novel nitro-oxy-methyl substituted analogues of celecoxib (NO-cel), potentially less cardiotoxic, has been investigated in vitro on human colon cancer cells and compared with action of the parent drug. Moreover, experiments were performed in order to evaluate whether COX-2 pharmacological inhibition may affect beta-catenin/E-cadherin signalling pathway. All the tested analogues of celecoxib exerted a significant antiproliferative activity on COX-2 positive HT-29 human colon cancer cells, being less effective on the COX-2 negative SW-480 human colon cancer cell line. In particular, the analogue displaying two nitro-oxy functions fully mimicked the known inhibitory properties of celecoxib, including inhibition of COX-2, as well as of ERK/MAPK and beta-catenin signalling pathways. Interestingly, the latter compound also elicited a strong reorganization of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex, which has been suggested to be relevant for colon carcinogenesis. On these premises, NO-cel analogues of celecoxib can represent promising colon cancer chemopreventive agents potentially able to affect colon cancer development.
An early event in the toxic effects of organic arsenic compounds, such as phenylarsine oxide (PAO), is an inhibition of glucose uptake. Glucose uptake involving the glucose transporter, GLUT4 is inhibited by PAO indicating an importance of vicinal sulfhydryls in insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. However, the data on effects of PAO on GLUT1 are conflicting. This study investigated the effects of PAO on glucose uptake in L929 fibroblast cells, cells, which express only GLUT1. The data presented here reveal a dual effect of PAO. At low concentrations or short exposure times PAO stimulated glucose uptake reaching a peak activation of about 400% at 3 microM. At higher concentrations (40 microM), PAO clearly inhibited glucose uptake. At intermediate concentrations (10 microM), PAO had no effect under basal conditions but completely inhibited activation of glucose uptake by glucose deprivation and partially inhibited methylene blue-stimulated glucose uptake. PAO increased the specific binding of cytochalasin B to GLUT1 suggesting a direct interaction with the transporter. These data are most consistent with PAO interacting with multiple proteins that regulate the activity of this transporter, one of which may be GLUT1 itself. The identity of these proteins will require further investigation.
Benzene exposure is well demonstrated as a cause of acute myelogenous leukemia, but not of chronic myelogenous leukemia. Previous literature reviews based on case series and cohort studies have not shown an association. We have now conducted a literature search for case-control studies that examine the association between benzene exposure and chronic myelogenous leukemia. Six case-control studies have been found. These derive from occupational groups, cancer registries, and a clinical laboratory. Their exposure ascertainments are all based on job histories, job-exposure matricies, or industrial hygiene data. The odds ratios (ORs) for individual studies range from 0.73 to 1.2. The pooled OR is 1.003 with 95% confidence interval (CI) of 0.94-1.07 (p=0.98) for both a fixed effects model and a random effects model. The case-control literature indicates that chronic myelogenous leukemia does not appear to be related to benzene exposure.
Inflammatory reactions to microbial infections may cause male infertility. The mechanisms of inhibition of spermatogenesis can be studied in vitro using rat Sertoli cells. Bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) induce acute inflammations. So LPS treated Sertoli cells can be used to test for new therapeutic compounds. The present study aimed to investigate the protective efficacy of dl-alpha-lipoic acid (LA) on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced oxidative stress in adult rat Sertoli cells. Sertoli cells were divided into 4 groups. Group I served as a control incubated with water (vehicle). Groups II and IV were incubated with 100 microM LA for 24h before incubating Groups III and IV with 50 microg/ml lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 12h. In Group III cells (LPS-treated, no LA) the lactate concentration was decreased whereas hydrogen peroxide production and lipid peroxidation were significantly increased. Moreover, the activities of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, catalase, glutathione-S-transferase, glutathione reductase were reduced. The concentrations of antioxidant molecules such as reduced glutathione and vitamin C were significantly decreased. The activities of enzymes normally elevated in Sertoli cells, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase and beta-glucuronidase, were significantly decreased. Treatment with LA (100 microM) for 24h before LPS-treatment (Group IV), prevented these changes in enzyme activities and metabolite concentrations. Therefore, LA may have a cyto-protective role during LPS-induced inflammation in adult rat Sertoli cells.
Chronic exposure to copper induces hepatocellular apoptosis with greater injury in the periportal region compared to the perivenous region. Here we have identified the factors responsible for the development of regional damage in the liver under in vivo conditions. Enhanced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) with predominance of superoxide radical (O(2)(-)) indicates the contribution of redox imbalance in the process. This may be linked with copper catalyzed oxidation of GSH to GSSG resulting in the generation of O(2)(-). Downregulation of Cu-Zn SOD in consequence of the degradation of this enzyme, causes decreased dismutation of O(2)(-), that further contributes to the enhanced level of O(2)(-) in the periportal region. Decreased functioning of Mn SOD activity, reduction in mitochondrial thiol/disulphide ratio and generation of O(2)(-) were much higher in the mitochondria from periportal region, which point to the involvement of this organelle in the regional hepatotoxicity observed during copper exposure. This was supported by copper-mediated enhanced mitochondrial dysfunction as evident from ATP depletion, collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and induction of mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT). Results suggest the active participation of O(2)(-) in inducing mitochondrial dysfunction preferentially in the periportal region that eventually leads to the development of hepatotoxicity due to copper exposure under in vivo condition.
Oxaliplatin, a chemotherapeutic drug, induces DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells. It has been shown that gamma-H2AX acts as a marker of DSBs. However, the molecular events associated with oxaliplatin-mediated cell cycle arrest and cell death remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the roles of p53 and gamma-H2AX following oxaliplatin treatment, as they are important effector proteins for apoptosis and DSB repair, respectively. Both phosphorylated-p53 (Ser-15) and gamma-H2AX were up-regulated and accumulated in the nuclei of p53-wild type human colorectal cancer HCT116 cells after exposure to oxaliplatin. Concomitantly, oxaliplatin-induced G2/M arrest was associated with a reduction in both cyclin B1 expression and phosphorylated-CDC2 (Thr-161). Release of G2/M arrest by caffeine was accompanied by a decrease in the levels of p53/p21; however, gamma-H2AX levels were unchanged. Furthermore, inhibition of p53 phosphorylation by pifithrin-alpha was sufficient to reduce the oxaliplatin-induced up-regulation of gamma-H2AX and apoptosis. Oxaliplatin-induced gamma-H2AX via a p53-independent pathway but did not cause caspase-3 activation in p53-null HCT116 cells. Interestingly, no changes were observed in the H2AX gene knockdown with regards to oxaliplatin-induced G2/M arrest in p53-wild type and S phase arrest in p53-null HCT116 cells. Taken together, these data indicate that a molecular pathway involving p53, gamma-H2AX and cell cycle arrest plays a pivotal role in the cellular response to oxaliplatin.
We previously reported that andrographolide greatly enhanced the expression of CYP1A1. Since andrographolide is a major constituent of Andrographis paniculata, which has been employed for centuries in Asia and Europe as a folk remedy, we further analyzed genes whose expression was modified by andrographolide using primary-cultured mouse hepatocytes in a microarray assay. With the threshold for modification set at 2-fold, andrographolide up-regulated 18 genes among 28,853 genes, most of them related to metabolism/oxidation/reduction. Meanwhile, 5 genes, related to protein binding or calcium ion binding, were down-regulated. A combination of beta-naphthoflavone (beta-NF), a CYP1A inducer, and andrographolide modified the expression of 45 genes (27 up-regulated and 18 down-regulated), although beta-NF single treatment up-regulated 4 genes. The affected genes were again mostly related to metabolism and oxidation-reduction. Among P450 isoforms, andrographolide by itself induced CYP1A1, CYP2A4, CYP2B9, and CYP2B10 expression. Synergistic expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. These observations suggest that drug interaction and risk assessment with the use of andrographolide or A. paniculata should be elucidated.
Fucoxanthin is one of the most abundant carotenoids found in Undaria pinnatifida and has been shown to inhibit tumor proliferation in vitro. However, the mechanisms underlying the anti-cancer effects of fucoxanthin are unclear. In this study, we hypothesized that fucoxanthin may cause cell cycle arrest and enhance gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) in SK-Hep-1 human hepatoma cells. Data revealed that fucoxanthin (1-20microM) strongly and concentration-dependently inhibited the proliferation of SK-Hep-1 cells at 24h of incubation, whereas fucoxanthin facilitated the growth of a murine embryonic hepatic (BNL CL.2) cells at 24h of incubation and only slightly slowed the cell proliferation at 48h. In SK-Hep-1 cells, fucoxanthin caused cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and induced cell apoptosis, as evidenced by increased subG1 cells and induction of DNA strand breaks. Using scrape loading-dye-transfer assay, fucoxanthin was found to significantly enhance GJIC of SK-Hep-1 cells without affecting that of BNL CL.2 cells. In addition, fucoxanthin significantly increased protein and mRNA expressions of connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 32 (Cx32) in SK-Hep-1 cells. Moreover, fucoxanthin markedly increased the concentration of intracellular calcium levels in SK-Hep-1 cells. Thus, fucoxanthin is specifically antiproliferative against SK-Hep-1 cells, and the effect is associated with upregulation of Cx32 and Cx43, which enhances GJIC of SK-Hep-1 cells. The enhanced GJIC may be responsible for the increase of the intracellular calcium level, which then causes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Recent evidences have shown that the in vivo antioxidant chemistry of organoselenium compounds such as diphenyl diselenide (DPDS) is complex and it is not completely understood. The complexity is partly due to the fact that DPDS is generally thought to exert its antioxidant action by mimicking glutathione peroxidase (GPx) with concomitant utilization of glutathione (GSH) in vitro. In contrast to in vitro data, we recently observed that DPDS increases rather than diminish GSH levels in diabetic models. The present study therefore sought to investigate a possible change in the antioxidant mechanisms of DPDS in changing physiological pH that may be associated with hyperglycaemia. The results show that in all the pHs tested (acidic, neutral or basic), DPDS did not exhibit either free radical scavenging ability or Fe2+ chelating effect. However, DPDS exhibited increasing ability to reduce Fe3+ with increasing pH. On the other hand, the GPx mimic of DPDS was maximal at physiological pH and totally abolished in the acidic medium. Furthermore, we observed that irrespective of the pH of the medium, DPDS significantly inhibited both deoxyribose degradation under H2O2 and Fe2+ assault and lipid peroxidation induced by either Fe2+ or sodium nitroprusside; suggesting that the antioxidant mechanism of DPDS in the acidic medium may not be related to its generally accepted GPx mimic. Taken together, we speculate that the antioxidant mechanism of DPDS against macromolecular damage in biological system is complex and may not be strictly related to its GPx mimic, a mechanism generally regarded as the most important antioxidant mechanism of organoselenium compounds.
In order to elucidate the effect on mammal systems of new derivatives from 2-hydroxy-3-allyl-naphthoquinone, alpha-iodinated naphthofuranquinone (NPPN-3223), beta-iodinated naphthofuranquinone (NPPN-3222) and beta-methyl naphthofuranquinone (NPPN-3226) synthesized as possible trypanocidal agents, their effect on rat liver microsomal lipid peroxidation was investigated. They (a) inhibited NADPH-dependent, iron-catalyzed microsomal rat liver lipid peroxidation; (b) did not inhibit the tert-butyl hydroperoxide-dependent lipid peroxidation; (c) did not inhibit ascorbate-lipid peroxidation with the exception of NPPN-3226 which did inhibit it; (d) stimulated NADPH oxidation and microsomal oxygen uptake; (e) increased superoxide anion formation by NADPH-supplemented microsomes and (f) stimulated ascorbate oxidation. The three drugs were reduced to their seminaphthofuranquinone radical by the liver NADPH-P450 reductase system, as detected by ESR measurements. These results support the hypothesis that naphthofuranquinones reduction by microsomal NADPH-P450 reductase and semiquinone oxidation by molecular oxygen diverts electrons, preventing microsomal lipid peroxidation. In addition, hydroquinones and/or semiquinones formed by naphthofuranquinones reduction would be capable of lipid peroxidation inhibition and on interacting with the lipid peroxide radicals can lead to an antioxidant effect as we suggested for NPPN-3226 in close agreement to the inhibition of ascorbate-lipid peroxidation. Due to the properties of these molecules and their incoming structure developments, naphthofuranquinones would be considered as potentially promising therapeutic agents, mainly against Chagas disease.
Resveratrol (3,4',5-trans-trihydroxystilbene) and other hydroxystilbenes exhibit in vitro antioxidant as well as prooxidant effects. The antioxidant properties are assumed to enable these compounds to protect cells from oxidative damage. The prooxidant effects are held likely to be responsible for their cytotoxic, anti-proliferative or pro-apoptotic effects observed in vitro. Regarding antioxidant/prooxidant activities in the past various studies were performed aiming at defining structure-activity relationships for hydroxystilbenes using cell-free systems. In the present study cultured C6 glioma cells were used in order to investigate the relationship between the antioxidant, cytoprotective and cytotoxic activities of resveratrol and selected analogues, e.g., 3,3',4',5-trans-tetrahydroxystilbene (piceatannol), 3,3',5,5'-trans-tetrahydroxystilbene (3,3',5,5'-THS) and 3,3',4',5,5'-trans-pentahydroxystilbene (3,3',4',5,5'-PHS). All these compounds were cytotoxic to growth-arrested C6 cells, with EC50-values between 20 and 85 microM. A higher cytotoxic potency in proliferating cells indicated a specific cytostatic activity of resveratrol and 3,3',4',5,5'-PHS. All hydroxystilbenes studied inhibited cellular radical generation induced by cumene hydroperoxide (CHP). The rank order of antioxidant potency was resveratrol>piceatannol>3,3',5,5'-THS>3,3',4',5,5'-PHS. However, only resveratrol and piceatannol inhibited cellular radical generation at lower than cytotoxic concentrations. At subcytotoxic concentrations only piceatannol was able to protect the cells from damage caused by CHP. Taken together, these results show that neither the cytotoxic or cytostatic activities of hydroxystilbenes nor their cytoprotective and antioxidant activities in living cells can be predicted from their antioxidant and prooxidant activity, respectively, in cell-free systems.
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are ubiquitous and persistent environmental pollutants that accumulated in the food chain. Traditionally they are divided into dioxin-like (DL)- and non-dioxin-like (NDL)-PCBs. NDL-PCBs have been shown to have tumor promotive activity in mice and co-carcinogenic effects in rats. However the mechanisms are poorly understood, hampering the risk assessment of NDL-PCBs. We have previously shown that TCDD attenuates p53 response by phosphorylating its regulator Mdm2 at Ser166, and that Erk can mediate this effect in hepatocytes. In this study we investigated the effects of 20 NDL-PCBs (concentration range 0.01-10microM) on pMdm2 Ser166, pErk Tyr204 and p53 on HepG2 cells. Six of the NDL-PCBs induced pErk Tyr204 and pMdm3 Ser166. This effect correlated with lowered basal levels of p53, as well as with an attenuated p53 response induced by etoposide and leptomycin B. Similar effects were induced by TCDD and the DL-PCB 126. We conclude that both DL-PCBs and NDL-PCBs in low concentrations can induce alterations in p53 signaling and that these effects can be correlated to rat liver carcinogenesis.
Silymarin, one of the most popular herbal medicines, has been widely used for its hepatoprotective effects. This study investigates the effects of repeated dose of silymarin and its major ingredient, silibinin, on the pharmacokinetics of the antidepressant trazodone. Treatment groups included vehicle control group, concomitant silymarin at 1.0g/kg dose, and four 7-day repeated dose induction groups of 0.5 and 1.0g/kg silymarin and 0.175 and 0.35g/kg silibinin. Microdialysis coupled with high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to simultaneously monitor blood and bile concentrations of trazodone in the rats. Results indicate that pretreatment with an extremely high dose of 1.0g/kg silymarin significantly decreases trazodone's area under concentration curve (AUC), distribution half-life (t(1/2,alpha)), elimination half-life (t(1/2,beta)), and mean residence time (MRT). In conclusion, the present study finds no marked effects of silymarin and silibinin on the pharmacokinetics of trazodone under normal daily doses and the relative safety of taking the herb with trazodone.
The response of hepatic mono-oxygenase activities to Aroclor 1254 or 3-methylcholanthrene was investigated in wild-type and Cyp1a2(-/-) mice. Cytochrome P450 concentrations were similar in naïve Cyp1a2(-/-) and wild-type mice. There was no difference between naïve wild-type and Cyp1a2(-/-) animals in 7-ethoxyresorufin and 7-ethoxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin dealkylase activities, nor was the induction response after 3-methylcholanthrene any different between the two genotypes. However, both activities were induced to a higher extent in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice after Aroclor 1254. In contrast, 7-pentoxyresorufin dealkylation activity was lower in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice and this differential was maintained during induction by both agents. 7-Methoxy- and 7-benzoxyresorufin dealkylation activities were also lower than wild-type in naïve Cyp1a2(-/-) animals and during 3-methylcholanthrene induction, but showed accelerated induction in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice with Aroclor 1254. Bufuralol 1'- and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activities, and P450 characteristics were evaluated 48h after inducer administration. Bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, a sexual dimorphic activity (female>male) showed no genotype differences in naïve animals. Activity changes varied across gender and genotype, with 3-methylcholanthrene and Aroclor 1254 inducing in male Cyp1a2(-/-), and Aroclor 1254 inducing in female wild-type. Testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activity was 16% higher in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice and neither 3-methylcholanthrene nor Aroclor 1254 elicited induction. After Aroclor 1254, a 24% increase in P450 concentration with a hypsochromic shift in the ferrous-CO maximum characteristic of CYP1A enzymes occurred in wild-type, compared to no change in either parameter in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice. Induction changes with 3-methylcholanthrene were greater in wild-type mice, a 60% increase in concentration and approximately 2 nm hypsochromic shift versus a 10% increase and approximately 1nm hypsochromic shift in Cyp1a2(-/-) mice. The study demonstrates that deletion of a single P450 can profoundly affect the induction response, as monitored with activities of other P450s, in a manner unrelated to the contribution of the deleted P450 to the activity.
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils are professional phagocytes whose efficacy depends on a multicomponent NADPH oxidase for generating superoxide anions and bacterial killing. They can be primed and activated by different agents that can impair oxidative burst and phagocytosis with opposite effects: reduced capability to destroy bacteria or hyperactivation that induces the generation of large quantities of toxic reactive oxygen species, which can damage surrounding tissue and participate in inflammation. The present study was designed to evaluate the effect of sub-chronic (60 days) permethrin treatment (1/10 DL(50)) on rat polymorphonuclear neutrophils respiratory burst. The results show that permethrin treatment increases superoxide anion production (33 times) and the activity of hydrogen peroxide-myeloperoxidase system (67 times). In vitro experiments suggest that this effect can be related to permethrin priming and to physico-chemical changes at the plasma membrane level of neutrophils. The antioxidant supplementation with Vitamin E and coenzyme Q(10) can protect against the abnormal respiratory burst in rat treated with permethrin. The in vitro studies show that neutrophil apoptosis begins soon after 1h of incubation with permethrin (0.725% of total cells) or its metabolites (3-phenoxybenzyl alcohol, 3-phenoxybenzaldehyde and 3-phenoxybenzoic acid 1.36, 2.26 and 1.3 of total cells, respectively) and that the level of apoptotic cells is very low. In conclusion, immunotoxicity of permethrin measured in rats could prompt future studies on the consequences of chronic insecticide exposure.
The pathophysiological changes and the oxidative-antioxidative status were evaluated in the bone microenvironment of rat inoculated with Walker 256/B mammary gland carcinoma cells, and used alpha-tocopherol acetate (ATA) as a countermeasure. Walker 256/B cells were injected into the right femora of aged male rats. Animals were randomized into three groups: 12 rats were injected with saline (control group); 14 rats were injected with Walker 256/B cells (5x10(4)) in the medullar cavity (W256 group); 14 rats were inoculated with Walker 256/B cells and treated with ATA (45mg/kg BW) (W256+ATA group). After 20 days, rats were euthanized and the femurs were radiographed. Micro architectural parameters were measured by microcomputed tomography and histology. Serum, bone and bone marrow were evaluated for oxidative damage. In parallel, cell cultures were done in the presence of ATA and ROS were measured by fluorescence; apoptotic cells were determined in parallel. W256 groups had osteolytic damages with marked resorption of cortical and trabecular bone. W256+ATA animals presented marked osteosclerotic areas associated with tumor necrosis areas inside the bone cavity. Levels of lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation were found to increase in W256 rats; a significant reduction in SOD and GSH-p activities was also observed. W256+ATA group had significantly reduced oxidative damage, but not reversed back to the control levels. The present study shows that Walker 256/B cells induce skeletal metastases associated with oxidative damage in the bone microenvironment. ATA reduced the oxidative stress damage, enhanced osteosclerosis and tumor cell apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo.
Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) has rapidly emerged in the USA as a cause of severe infections in previously healthy persons without traditional risk factors. We describe the epidemiology of severe CA-MRSA disease in the state of Georgia, USA and analyse the risk of death associated with three different clinical syndromes of CA-MRSA disease - pneumonia, invasive disease, and skin and soft-tissue infections (SSTIs). A total of 1670 cases of severe CA-MRSA disease were reported during 2005-2007. The case-fatality rate was 3.4%; sex and race of fatal and non-fatal cases did not differ significantly. While CA-MRSA pneumonia and invasive disease were less common than SSTIs, they were about 15 times more likely to result in death [risk ratio 16.69, 95% confidence interval (CI) 10.28-27.07 and 13.98, 95% CI 7.74-25.27, respectively]. When controlling for age and the presence of other clinical syndromes the odds of death in patients manifesting specific severe CA-MRSA syndromes was highest in those with pneumonia (odds ratio 11.34). Possible risk factors for severe CA-MRSA SSTI and pneumonia included the draining of lesions without medical assistance and an antecedent influenza-like illness.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) has been demonstrated to cause substantial disease in elderly and immunocompromised subjects. The relationship of serum antibody to RSV infection and the risk of infection in elderly subjects is controversial, thus we evaluated the presence of neutralizing antibodies to RSV in healthy people of different age groups and the correlation with viral protection. Baseline blood samples from 197 subjects aged 20-80 years were analysed for the presence of anti-RSV antibodies either by indirect immunofluorescence and microneutralization test. The percentage of people who had neutralizing antibodies to RSV was significantly higher (P=0.001) in the youngest group (92.51%) compared to the frail group (36.21%). The RSV antibody level tends to wane in some older people; this factor could determine proneness to RSV re-infections in the elderly who are at a greater risk of developing severe respiratory disease.
We obtained a list of all reported cases of haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) in Shenyang, China, during 1990-2003, and used GIS-based scan statistics to determine the distribution of HFRS cases and to identify key areas and periods for future risk-factor research. Spatial cluster analysis suggested three areas were at increased risk for HFRS. Temporal cluster analysis suggested one period was at increased risk for HFRS. Space-time cluster analysis suggested six areas from 1995 to 1996 and four areas from 1998 to 2003 were at increased risk for HFRS. We also discussed the likely reasons for these clusters. We conclude that GIS-based scan statistics may provide an opportunity to classify the epidemic situation of HFRS, and we can pursue future investigations to study the likely factors responsible for the increased disease risk based on the classification.
Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. have been the most common bacterial cause of human gastrointestinal disease in Denmark since 1999. In 2003, the Danish voluntary strategy to control Campylobacter was intensified. The focus was on biosecurity, allocation of meat from Campylobacter-negative broilers to the production of chilled products, and consumer information campaigns. From 2002 to 2007, the percentage of Campylobacter-positive broiler flocks at slaughter decreased from 43% to 27%. After processing, Campylobacter-positive samples of chilled broiler meat fell from 18% in 2004 to 8% in 2007. Furthermore, the number of registered human Campylobacter cases decreased by 12%; from 4379 cases in 2002 to 3865 cases in 2007. We believe that the observed decrease in the occurrence of Campylobacter in broilers and broiler meat and the coincidental fall in the number of registered human cases is, in part, a result of the implemented control strategy.
Salmonella infection in breeding pigs was the subject of a European survey in 2008. The prevalence of pig-breeding holdings infected with Salmonella was determined by microbiological culture of pooled pen faecal samples. The objective of this study was to estimate the sensitivity of pooled faecal sampling and to calculate the required sample sizes. To do this, individual and pooled faecal samples were collected from a sample of pens from nine farms. Bayesian methods were used to estimate the sensitivity of individual and pooled faecal sampling, and the degree of clustering of Salmonella at the pen level. Sample sizes were then calculated for various values of design prevalence, taking into account the clustering. Pooling was highly efficient compared to individual sampling, e.g. with 18 pooled samples required to detect a 10% prevalence with 95% certainty, compared to 35 individual rectal samples. We recommend that pooled sampling is used for detection of Salmonella in pigs. Results were influenced by the degree of clustering at pen level, and it is important to take this into account both in the estimation of appropriate sample sizes and the estimation of prevalence from pooled sample data.
Effective infection control measures during norovirus outbreaks are urgently needed in places where vulnerable individuals gather. In the present study, the effect of a number of measures was investigated in daily practice. Forty-nine Dutch nursing homes were monitored prospectively for norovirus outbreaks during two winter seasons. A total of 37 norovirus outbreaks were registered. Control measures were most effective when implemented within 3 days after onset of disease of the first patient. Measures targeted at reduced transmission between persons, via aerosols, and via contaminated surfaces reduced illness in staff and in residents. Reducing illness in staff results in fewer costs for sick leave and substitution of staff and less disruption in the care of residents. The effect of control measures on outbreak duration was limited. This is the first intervention study examining the effect of control measures. Further research is needed to extend and refine the conclusions.
The aim was to estimate the incidence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection in health-care workers (HCWs) in Japan. We repeated cross-sectional surveys of HCWs with QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT-G) in 2003, 2005 and 2007 at a hospital with tuberculosis (TB) wards, and 311 HCWs who underwent QFT-G testing two or three times were included in the study. Five HCWs (1.8%) converted from negative to positive. Incidence of new TB infection was estimated to be 0.6/100 person-years by the CDC's definition. Thirteen positive persons (41%) reverted from positive to negative. Multivariable logistic regression analysis identified a significant association between QFT-G conversion and working in TB wards. The IFN-gamma levels of all but two subjects with reverting or converting QFT-G results were close to the test's cut-off. The incidence of Mtb infection in HCWs at our hospital was higher than that estimated for the general population in Japan. Criteria for defining QFT-G conversion and reversion need further investigation considering the high proportion of reversion, as the incidence of infection would have changed if we had applied other definitions.
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) regulation in adults is influenced by early psychosocial adversity, but the role of infectious disease history is poorly understood. We studied the association between cumulative pathogen burden and cortisol profile over the day in a sample of 317 healthy men and women aged 51-72 years. Cumulative pathogen burden was defined as positive serostatus for Chlamydia pneumoniae, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1). Salivary cortisol was sampled repeatedly over the day. The cortisol slope was defined as the decrease across the day and evening. Age, gender, grade of employment, body mass index, smoking status, self-rated health, cardiovascular medication, depressed mood and time of waking were included as covariates. The pathogen burden averaged 1.76 (s.d.=0.92). The cortisol slope was inversely associated with pathogen burden after controlling for covariates. When individual pathogens were studied, only CMV was associated with flatter cortisol rhythms in isolation. We conclude that pathogen burden is independently associated with flatter cortisol slopes over the day, and may contribute to disturbed neuroendocrine regulation.
The aim of this study was to demonstrate the epidemiological use of multiple correspondence analysis (MCA), as applied to tuberculosis (TB) data from North East London. Data for TB notifications in North East London primary care trusts (PCTs) between the years 2002 and 2007 were used. TB notification data were entered for MCA allowing display of graphical data output (n=4947); MCA analyses were performed on the whole dataset, by PCT, and by year of notification. Graphical MCA output displayed variance of data categories; clustering of variable categories in MCA output signified association. Clustering patterns in MCA output demonstrated different associations by year of notification, within PCTs and between PCTs. MCA is a useful technique for displaying association of variable categories used in TB epidemiology. Results suggest that MCA could be a useful tool in informing commissioning of TB services.
Between 3 April and 18 May 2007, 21 confirmed cases of measles were reported in members of the Irish traveller ethnic group who attended a funeral in London, England. The Health Protection Agency conducted an investigation to determine the extent of this outbreak in order to inform prevention of future outbreaks. From 23 March to 30 June, 173 outbreak-associated cases from seven regions throughout England were identified; 156 cases were in Irish travellers and 17 were epidemiologically linked to cases in that community. In total, 124 cases were laboratory confirmed (IgM or RNA); none were vaccinated against measles. MMR vaccination was offered on traveller sites. Low vaccination coverage and the movement of traveller communities present particular challenges for measles elimination in Europe. We recommend parallel approaches to improve integration of Irish travellers within routine health services whilst offering targeted interventions to increase vaccine uptake in this marginalized community.
Seroprevalence data from a representative population were used to estimate the annual incidence of congenital toxoplasmosis in São Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR). Retrospective anti-toxoplasma IgG serological analysis was conducted to determine age-dependent seroprevalence, force of infection, average age of acquisition of infection and curve of decay of maternally derived antibodies. Seroprevalence was used to calculate the number of new infections. Toxoplasmosis in pregnant women was estimated by total number of deliveries in a given year as a proxy for the number of pregnancies per year. Toxoplasma seroprevalence was 64.9% in women of childbearing age. Average age of acquisition of toxoplasmosis was 10.74 years. The estimated annual incidence of congenital toxoplasmosis varied from 9.5 to 10.6/1000 births in the studied period. The toxoplasmosis seroprevalence model allowed a good incidence estimation of congenital disease in SPMR compared to other published data, indicating that this mathematical approach is useful in calculating the potential demand of congenital disease due to Toxoplasma gondii in a given community.
Cryptosporidium species have emerged as a major cause of outbreaks of diarrhoea and have been associated with consumption of contaminated recreational and drinking water and food as well as contact with infected attendees of child-care programmes. In August 2007, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment detected an increase in cryptosporidiosis cases over baseline values. We conducted a case-control study to assess risk factors for infection and collected stool specimens from ill persons for microscopy and molecular analysis. Laboratory-confirmed cases (n=47) were more likely to have swallowed untreated water from a lake, river, or stream [adjusted matched odds ratio (aOR) 8.0, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.3-48.1], have had exposure to recreational water (aOR 4.6, 95% CI 1.4-14.6), or have had contact with a child in a child-care programme or in diapers (aOR 3.8, 95% CI 1.5-9.6). Although exposure to recreational water is commonly implicated in summertime cryptosporidiosis outbreaks, this study demonstrates that investigations of increased incidence of cases in summer should also examine other potential risk factors. This study emphasizes the need for public health education efforts that address the multiple transmission routes for Cryptosporidium and appropriate prevention measures to avoid future transmission.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) seroprevalence was determined in 9343 first-time New Zealand blood donors between 2003 and 2006. Of 39 960 current seropositive donors the proportion testing seropositive more than 12 months previously was calculated. Overall, seroprevalence declined from 66.1% [95% confidence interval (CI) 64.1-68.1] in 2003 to 60.6% (95% CI 58.5-62.6) in 2006. Nevertheless, these rates are significantly higher than the 47% overall seroprevalence found in a 1988 study. Seroprevalence was higher in females than males and in older than in younger age groups in all four years examined. Ethnicity appeared to be related to seroprevalence with the highest rates found in Pacific Islanders (93.2%) and the lowest in Caucasians (54.8%). At least 38 242/39 960 (95.7%) seropositive donors were found to have seroconverted more than 12 months previously. Recent evidence suggests that such 'remote' seroconverters may pose a much lower risk of transfusion-transmitted CMV infection than recently infected seroconverting, but seronegative, blood donors.
Surveillance for gastroenteritis rarely detects small, intra-familial outbreaks. This study examined intra-household transmission of gastroenteritis using prospectively collected data from 2811 participants (600 households) in a community-based study. There were 258 household clusters of gastroenteritis during the 15 months of observation involving 774 residents (28% of total). Age <6 years and attendance at a day care/kindergarten were associated with increased likelihood of inclusion in a cluster. The reach of illness into the household was extensive, with 63% of household members affected by symptoms during clusters. Simultaneous and secondary transmission of gastroenteritis appeared equally common. In only 20% of clusters did more than one member submit a faecal specimen. Of clusters where two or more specimens were submitted, concordance in laboratory confirmation of pathogens was 18.8%. Our results show that clustering of gastrointestinal symptoms within households occurs commonly, but reliance on pathogen notification data will substantially underestimate the true frequency of gastroenteritis clusters.
Surveillance has been recognized as a fundamental component in the control of antimicrobial- resistant infections. Although surveillance data have been widely published and utilized by researchers and decision makers, little attention has been paid to assessment of their validity. We conducted this review in order to identify and explore potential types and magnitude of bias that may influence the validity or interpretation of surveillance data. Six main potential areas were assessed. These included bias related to use of inadequate or inappropriate (1) denominator data, (2) case definitions, and (3) case ascertainment; (4) sampling bias; (5) failure to deal with multiple occurrences, and (6) those related to laboratory practice and procedures. The magnitude of these biases varied considerably for the above areas within different study populations. There are a number of potential biases that should be considered in the methodological design and interpretation of antimicrobial-resistant organism surveillance.
Laboratory-based surveillance by OzFoodNet in Australia and FoodNet in the USA indicated that the incidence of Campylobacter infections in 2001 in Australia was about nine times higher than in the USA. We assessed whether this disparity could be explained by differences in the frequency of stool culturing. Using data from population surveys of diarrhoea and symptom profiles for Campylobacter from case-control studies, indices of healthcare behaviour taking into account the severity of Campylobacter infections were calculated. These suggest that culture-confirmed Campylobacter infections underestimate the incidence of community cases by similar ratios in the two countries. The incidence of Campylobacter infections in Australia was about 12 times higher than in the USA after consideration of healthcare system differences.
Data from the first sentinel site (Waterloo Region, Ontario) of the Canadian Integrated Enteric Disease Surveillance System (C-EnterNet) were used in a secondary-based case-control study of laboratory-confirmed Cryptosporidium infections to study the role of various exposure factors. The incidence of cryptosporidiosis in Waterloo Region was almost double both the provincial and national rates. Persons ill with one of nine other enteric infections (amoebiasis, campylobacteriosis, cyclosporiasis, giardiasis, listeriosis, salmonellosis, shigellosis, verotoxigenic E. coli infections, yersiniosis) captured by the surveillance system were used as the control group. Of 1204 cases of enteric illness in the sentinel area between April 2005 and December 2007, 36 cases and 803 controls were selected after excluding outbreak and international travel-related cases. Univariable analyses (Pearson chi2 and Fisher's exact tests) and multivariable logistic regression were performed. Results of the multivariable analysis found that cryptosporidiosis was associated with swimming in a lake or river (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.2-7.4), drinking municipal water (a potential surrogate for urban respondents vs. rural) (OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.04-5.7), and having a family member with a diarrhoeal illness (OR 2.9, 95% CI 1.3-6.4).
Due to its extensive polymorphism, a partial sequence of the Cryptosporidium surface glycoprotein gene gp60 has been frequently used as a genetic marker. I explored the global diversity of this protein, and compared its sequence diversity in Cryptosporidium parvum and Cryptosporidium hominis. In marked contrast to the geographical partition of C. parvum and C. hominis multi-locus genotypes, gp60 allelic groups showed no evidence of segregating in space, or of differing with respect to geographical diversity. Globally, genetic diversity of C. hominis gp60 exceeded that of C. parvum. Within C. parvum, gp60 alleles originating from human isolates were more diverse than those infecting ruminants. Phylogenetic analysis grouped gp60 sequences into a small number of relatively homogenous allelic groups, with only a small number of alleles having evolved independently. With the notable exception of a group of alleles restricted to humans, C. parvum alleles are found in ruminants and humans.
On 24 August 2008, an outbreak alert regarding cases of acute gastroenteritis in Podgorica triggered investigations to guide control measures. From 23 August to 7 September, 1699 cases were reported in Podgorica (population 136 000) and we estimated the total size of the outbreak to be 10 000-15 000 corresponding to an attack rate of approximately 10%. We conducted an age- and neighbourhood-matched case-control study, microbiologically analysed faecal and municipal water samples and assessed the water distribution system. All cases (83/83) and 90% (80/90) [corrected] of controls drank unboiled chlorinated municipal water [matched odds ratio (mOR) 11.2, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.6-infinity]. Consumption of bottled water was inversely associated with illness (mOR 0.3, 95% CI 0.1-0.8). Analyses of faecal samples identified six norovirus genotypes (21/38 samples) and occasionally other viruses. Multiple defects in the water distribution system were noted. These results suggest that the outbreak was caused by faecally contaminated municipal water. It is unusual to have such a large outbreak in a European city especially when the municipal water supply is chlorinated. Therefore, it is important to establish effective multiple-barrier water-treatment systems whenever possible, but even with an established chlorinated supply, sustained vigilance is central to public health.
This study evaluated whether antibiotic cycling programmes using broad-spectrum agents including carbapenems were associated with increased rates of colonization or infection by Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Retrospective analyses of colonization or infection by S. maltophilia from 1992 to 2002 were conducted using University of Virginia Hospital clinical microbiology records of patients with any culture positive for S. maltophilia and hospital epidemiology records of nosocomial S. maltophilia infections. Incidence rates were calculated and compared for cycling and non-cycling periods. No significant differences were found in incidence rates of S. maltophilia isolates between cycling and non-cycling periods, but there was a significant secular increase in the hospital-wide rate of infections caused by S. maltophilia (P=0.01728). Antibiotic cycling protocols were not associated with a significantly increased rate of colonization of S. maltophilia as determined by the frequency of patients having at least one positive routine clinical culture in this hospital.
Guinea pigs (GP) were exposed (head only) in individual plethysmographs to various concentrations of sulfur mustard vapor, determined online, using FTIR attached to flow chamber. The LCt(50) and the inhaled LD(50) were calculated at different time points post exposure. Surviving animals were monitored for clinical symptoms, respiratory parameters and body weight changes for up to 30 days. Clinical symptoms were noted at 3 h post exposure, characterized by erythematic and swelling nose with extensive mucous secretion (with or without bleeding). At 6 h post exposure most of the guinea pigs had breathing difficulties, rhonchi and dyspnea and few deaths were noted. These symptoms peaked at 48 h and were noted up to 8 days, associated with few additional deaths. Thereafter, a spontaneous healing was noted, characterized by recovery of respiratory parameters and normal weight gain with almost complete apparent healing within 2 weeks. Histopathological evaluation of lungs and trachea in the surviving GPs at 4 weeks post exposure revealed a dose-dependent residual injury in both lung and trachea expressed by abnormal recovery of the tracheal epithelium concomitant with a dose-dependent increase in cellular volume in the lungs. These abnormal epithelial regeneration and lung remodeling were accompanied with significant changes in protein, LDH, differential cell count and glutathione levels in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). It is suggested that the abnormal epithelial growth and cellular infiltration into the lung as well as the continuous lung inflammation could cause recurrent lung injury similar to that reported for HD exposed human casualties.
Nanoparticles have been explored recently as an efficient means of delivering photosensitizers for cancer diagnosis and photodynamic therapy (PDT). Silicon phthalocyanine 4 (Pc4) is currently being clinically tested as a photosensitizer for PDT. Unfortunately, Pc4 aggregates in aqueous solutions, which dramatically reduces its PDT efficacy and therefore limits its clinical application. We have encapsulated Pc4 using silica nanoparticles (Pc4SNP), which not only improved the aqueous solubility, stability, and delivery of the photodynamic drug but also increased its photodynamic efficacy compared to free Pc4 molecules. Pc4SNP generated photo-induced singlet oxygen more efficiently than free Pc4 as measured by chemical probe and EPR trapping techniques. Transmission electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering measurements showed that the size of the particles is in the range of 25-30 nm. Cell viability measurements demonstrated that Pc4SNP was more phototoxic to A375 or B16-F10 melanoma cells than free Pc4. Pc4SNP photodamaged melanoma cells primarily through apoptosis. Irradiation of A375 cells in the presence of Pc4SNP resulted in a significant increase in intracellular protein-derived peroxides, suggesting a Type II (singlet oxygen) mechanism for phototoxicity. More Pc4SNP than free Pc4 was localized in the mitochondria and lysosomes. Our results show that these stable, monodispersed silica nanoparticles may be an effective new formulation for Pc4 in its preclinical and clinical studies. We expect that modifying the surface of silicon nanoparticles encapsulating the photosensitizers with antibodies specific to melanoma cells will lead to even better early diagnosis and targeted treatment of melanoma in the future.
4-vinylcyclohexene diepoxide (VCD) is an ovotoxicant that specifically destroys primordial and small primary follicles in the ovaries of mice and rats. In contrast, 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) is ovotoxic to all ovarian follicle classes. This study investigated phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase signaling involvement in VCD- and DMBA-induced ovotoxicity. Postnatal day (PND) 4 Fischer 344 (F344) rat whole ovaries were cultured for 2-12 days in vehicle control, VCD (30 microM), or DMBA (1 microM), +/-PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 (20 microM) or its inactive analog LY303511 (20 microM). Following culture, ovaries were histologically evaluated, and healthy follicles were classified and counted. PI3 kinase inhibition had no effect on primordial follicle number, but reduced (P<0.05) small primary and larger follicles beginning on day 4. VCD caused primordial and small primary follicle loss (P<0.05) beginning on day 6. With PI3 kinase inhibition, VCD did not affect primordial follicles (P>0.05) at any time, but did cause loss (P<0.05) of small primary follicles. DMBA exposure caused primordial and small primary follicle loss (P<0.05) on day 6. Further, DMBA-induced primordial and small primary follicle loss was greater with PI3 kinase inhibition (P<0.05) than with DMBA alone. These results support that (1) PI3 kinase mediates primordial to small primary follicle recruitment, (2) VCD, but not DMBA, enhances ovotoxicity by increasing primordial to small primary follicle recruitment, and (3) in addition to xenobiotic-induced ovotoxicity, VCD is also a useful model chemical with which to elucidate signaling mechanisms involved in primordial follicle recruitment.
Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mass resulting from an imbalance between bone resorption by osteoclasts and bone formation by osteoblasts. Therefore, decreased bone formation by osteoblasts may lead to the development of osteoporosis, and rate of apoptosis is responsible for the regulation of bone formation. Arsenic (As) exists ubiquitously in our environment and increases the risk of neurotoxicity, liver injury, peripheral vascular disease and cancer. However, the effect of As on apoptosis of osteoblasts is mostly unknown. Here, we found that As induced cell apoptosis in osteoblastic cell lines (including hFOB, MC3T3-E1 and MG-63) and mouse bone marrow stromal cells (M2-10B4). As also induced upregulation of Bax and Bak, downregulation of Bcl-2 and dysfunction of mitochondria in osteoblasts. As also triggered endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, as indicated by changes in cytosolic-calcium levels. We found that As increased the expression and activities of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and calpain. Transfection of cells with GRP78 or calpain siRNA reduced As-mediated cell apoptosis in osteoblasts. Therefore, our results suggest that As increased cell apoptosis in cultured osteoblasts and increased the risk of osteoporosis.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nano-particles (<100 nm in diameter) have been of interest in a wide range of applications, such as in cosmetics and pharmaceuticals because of their low toxicity. However, recent studies have shown that TiO2 nano-particles (nano-TiO2) induce cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in various lines of cultured cells as well as tumorigenesis in animal models. The biological roles of nano-TiO2 are shown to be controversial and no comprehensive study paradigm has been developed to investigate their molecular mechanisms. In this study, we showed that short-term exposure to nano-TiO2 enhanced cell proliferation, survival, ERK signaling activation and ROS production in cultured fibroblast cells. Moreover, long-term exposure to nano-TiO2 not only increased cell survival and growth on soft agar but also the numbers of multinucleated cells and micronucleus (MN) as suggested in confocal microscopy analysis. Cell cycle phase analysis showed G2/M delay and slower cell division in long-term exposed cells. Most importantly, long-term TiO2 exposure remarkably affected mitotic progression at anaphase and telophase leading to aberrant multipolar spindles and chromatin alignment/segregation. Moreover, PLK1 was demonstrated as the target for nano-TiO2 in the regulation of mitotic progression and exit. Notably, a higher fraction of sub-G1 phase population appeared in TiO2-exposed cells after releasing from G2/M synchronization. Our results demonstrate that long-term exposure to nano-TiO2 disturbs cell cycle progression and duplicated genome segregation, leading to chromosomal instability and cell transformation.
Malignant transformation was demonstrated in UROtsa cells following 52-weeks of exposure to 50 nM monomethylarsonous acid (MMA(III)); the result was the malignantly transformed cell line, URO-MSC. URO-MSC cells were used to study the induction of DNA damage and the alteration of DNA repair enzymes in both the presence of MMA(III) [URO-MSC(+)] and after subsequent removal of MMA(III) [URO-MSC(-)] following chronic, low-level exposure. In the presence of MMA(III), URO-MSC(+) cells demonstrated a sustained increase in DNA damage following 12-weeks of exposure; in particular, a significant increase in DNA single-strand breaks at 12-weeks of exposure consistently elevated through 52 weeks. The persistence of DNA damage in URO-MSC cells was assessed after a 2-week removal of MMA(III). URO-MSC(-) cells demonstrated a decrease in DNA damage compared to URO-MSC(+); however, DNA damage in URO-MSC(-) remained significantly elevated when compared to untreated UROtsa and increased in a time-dependent manner. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) were demonstrated to be a critical component in the generation of DNA damage determined through the incubation of ROS scavengers with URO-MSC cells. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) is a key repair enzyme in DNA single-strand break repair. URO-MSC(+) resulted in a slight increase in PARP activity after 36-weeks of MMA(III) exposure, suggesting the presence of MMA(III) is inhibiting the increase in PARP activity. In support, PARP activity in URO-MSC(-) increased significantly, coinciding with a subsequent decrease in DNA damage demonstrated in URO-MSC(-) compared to URO-MSC(+). These data demonstrate that chronic, low-level exposure of UROtsa cells to 50 nM MMA(III) results in: the induction of DNA damage that remains elevated upon removal of MMA(III); increased levels of ROS that play a role in MMA(III) induced-DNA damage; and decreased PARP activity in the presence of MMA(III).
The Zrt/Irt-related protein 8 (ZIP8) encoded by slc39a8 is now emerging as an important zinc transporter involved in cellular cadmium incorporation. We have previously shown that mRNA and protein levels of ZIP8 were decreased in cadmium-resistant metallothionein-null (A7) cells, leading to a decrease in cadmium accumulation. However, the mechanism by which ZIP8 expression is suppressed in these cells remains to be elucidated. In the present study, we investigated the possibility that epigenetic silencing of the slc39a8 gene by DNA hypermethylation is involved in the down-regulation of ZIP8 expression. A7 cells showed a higher mRNA level of DNA methyltransferase 3b than parental cells. Hypermethylation of the CpG island of the slc39a8 gene was detected in A7 cells. Treatment of A7 cells with 5-aza-deoxycytidine, an inhibitor of DNA methyltransferase, caused demethylation of the CpG island of the slc39a8 gene and enhancement of mRNA and protein levels of ZIP8. In response to the recovery of ZIP8 expression, A7 cells treated with 5-aza-deoxycytidine showed an increase in cadmium accumulation and consequently an increase in sensitivity to cadmium. These results suggest that epigenetic silencing of the slc39a8 gene by DNA hypermethylation plays an important role in the down-regulation of ZIP8 in cadmium-resistant metallothionein-null cells.
Acetylcholinesterase (EC 3.1.1.7) and butyrylcholinesterase (EC 3.1.1.8) are enzymes that belong to the superfamily of alpha/beta-hydrolase fold proteins. While they share many characteristics, they also possess many important differences. For example, whereas they have about 54% amino acid sequence identity, the active site gorge of acetylcholinesterase is considerably smaller than that of butyrylcholinesterase. Moreover, both have been shown to display simple and complex kinetic mechanisms, depending on the particular substrate examined, the substrate concentration, and incubation conditions. In the current study, incubation of butyrylthiocholine in a concentration range of 0.005-3.0 mM, with 317 pM human butyrylcholinesterase in vitro, resulted in rates of production of thiocholine that were accurately described by simple Michaelis-Menten kinetics, with a K(m) of 0.10 mM. Similarly, the inhibition of butyrylcholinesterase in vitro by the organophosphate chlorpyrifos oxon was described by simple Michaelis-Menten kinetics, with a k(i) of 3048 nM(-1) h(-1), and a K(D) of 2.02 nM. In contrast to inhibition of butyrylcholinesterase, inhibition of human acetylcholinesterase by chlorpyrifos oxon in vitro followed concentration-dependent inhibition kinetics, with the k(i) increasing as the inhibitor concentration decreased. Chlorpyrifos oxon concentrations of 10 and 0.3 nM gave k(i)s of 1.2 and 19.3 nM(-1) h(-1), respectively. Although the mechanism of concentration-dependent inhibition kinetics is not known, the much smaller, more restrictive active site gorge of acetylcholinesterase almost certainly plays a role. Similarly, the much larger active site gorge of butyrylcholinesterase likely contributes to its much greater reactivity towards chlorpyrifos oxon, compared to acetylcholinesterase.
Exposure of Jurkat T cells to mollugin (15-30 microM), purified from the roots of Rubia cordifolia L., caused cytotoxicity and apoptotic DNA fragmentation along with mitochondrial membrane potential disruption, mitochondrial cytochrome c release, phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), activation of caspase-12, -9, -7, -3, and -8, cleavage of FLIP and Bid, and PARP degradation, without accompanying necrosis. While these mollugin-induced cytotoxicity and apoptotic events including activation of caspase-8 and mitochondria-dependent activation of caspase cascade were completely prevented by overexpression of Bcl-xL, the activation of JNK and caspase-12 was prevented to much lesser extent. Pretreatment of the cells with the pan-caspase inhibitor (z-VAD-fmk), the caspase-9 inhibitor (z-LEHD-fmk), the caspase-3 inhibitor (z-DEVD-fmk) or the caspase-12 inhibitor (z-ATAD-fmk) at the minimal concentration to prevent mollugin-induced apoptosis appeared to completely block the activation of caspase-7 and -8, and PARP degradation, but failed to block the activation of caspase-9 and -3 with allowing a slight enhancement in the level of JNK phosphorylation. Both FADD-positive wild-type Jurkat clone A3 and FADD-deficient Jurkat clone I2.1 exhibited a similar susceptibility to the cytotoxicity of mollugin, excluding involvement of Fas/FasL system in triggering mollugin-induced apoptosis. Normal peripheral T cells were more refractory to the cytotoxicity of mollugin than were Jurkat T cells. These results demonstrated that mollugin-induced cytotoxicity in Jurkat T cells was mainly attributable to apoptosis provoked via endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated activation of JNK and caspase-12, and subsequent mitochondria-dependent activation of caspase-9 and -3, leading to activation of caspase-7 and -8, which could be regulated by Bcl-xL.
Aberrant DNA methylation participates in carcinogenesis and is a molecular hallmark of a tumor cell. Tumor cells generally exhibit a redistribution of DNA methylation resulting in global hypomethylation with regional hypermethylation; however, the speed in which these changes emerge has not been fully elucidated and may depend on the temporal location of the cell in the path from normal, finite lifespan to malignant transformation. We used a model of arsenical-induced malignant transformation of immortalized human urothelial cells and DNA methylation microarrays to examine the extent and temporal nature of changes in DNA methylation that occur during the transition from immortal to malignantly transformed. Our data presented herein suggest that during arsenical-induced malignant transformation, aberrant DNA methylation occurs non-randomly, progresses gradually at hundreds of gene promoters, and alters expression of the associated gene, and these changes are coincident with the acquisition of malignant properties, such as anchorage independent growth and tumor formation in immunocompromised mice. The DNA methylation changes appear stable, since malignantly transformed cells removed from the transforming arsenical exhibited no reversion in DNA methylation levels, associated gene expression, or malignant phenotype. These data suggest that arsenicals act as epimutagens and directly link their ability to induce malignant transformation to their actions on the epigenome.
Palytoxin is classified as a non-12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-type skin tumor because it does not bind to or activate protein kinase C. Palytoxin is thus a novel tool for investigating alternative signaling pathways that may affect carcinogenesis. We previously showed that palytoxin activates three major members of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, extracellular signal regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38. Here we report that palytoxin also activates another MAPK family member, called ERK5, in HeLa cells and in keratinocytes derived from initiated mouse skin (308 cells). By contrast, TPA does not activate ERK5 in these cell lines. The major cell surface receptor for palytoxin is the Na+,K+-ATPase. Accordingly, ouabain blocked the ability of palytoxin to activate ERK5. Ouabain alone did not activate ERK5. ERK5 thus represents a divergence in the signaling pathways activated by these two agents that bind to the Na+,K+-ATPase. Cycloheximide, okadaic acid, and sodium orthovanadate did not mimic the effect of palytoxin on ERK5. These results indicate that the stimulation of ERK5 by palytoxin is not simply due to inhibition of protein synthesis or inhibition of serine/threonine or tyrosine phosphatases. Therefore, the mechanism by which palytoxin activates ERK5 differs from that by which it activates ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. Finally, studies that used pharmacological inhibitors and shRNA to block ERK5 action indicate that ERK5 contributes to palytoxin-stimulated c-Fos gene expression. These results suggest that ERK5 can act as an alternative mediator for transmitting diverse tumor promoter-stimulated signals.
The Fhit tumor suppressor protein possesses Ap(3)A (diadenosine triphosphate - ApppA) hydrolytic activity in vitro and its gene is found inactive in many pre-malignant states due to gene inactivation. For several years Fhit has been a widely investigated protein as its cellular function still remains largely unsolved. Fhit was shown to act as a molecular 'switch' of cell death via cascade operating on the influence of ATR-Chk1 pathway but also through the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Notably, Fhit was reported by our group to enhance the overall eradication effect of porphyrin-mediated photodynamic treatment (PDT). In this review the up-to-date findings on Fhit protein as a tumor suppressor and its role in PDT are presented.
A common animal model of chemical hepatocarcinogenesis was used to examine the utility of transcriptomic and proteomic data to identify early biomarkers related to chemically induced carcinogenesis. N-nitrosomorpholine, a frequently used genotoxic model carcinogen, was applied via drinking water at 120 mg/L to male Wistar rats for 7 weeks followed by an exposure-free period of 43 weeks. Seven specimens of each treatment group (untreated control and 120 mg/L N-nitrosomorpholine in drinking water) were sacrificed at nine time points during and after N-nitrosomorpholine treatment. Individual samples from the liver were prepared for histological and toxicogenomic analyses. For histological detection of preneoplastic and neoplastic tissue areas, sections were stained using antibodies against the placental form of glutathione-S-transferase (GST-P). Gene and protein expression profiles of liver tissue homogenates were analyzed using RG-U34A Affymetrix rat gene chips and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis-based proteomics, respectively. In order to compare results obtained by histopathology, transcriptomics and proteomics, GST-P-stained liver sections were evaluated morphometrically, which revealed a parallel time course of the area fraction of preneoplastic lesions and gene plus protein expression patterns. On the transcriptional level, an increase of hepatic GST-P expression was detectable as early as 3 weeks after study onset. Comparing deregulated genes and proteins, eight species were identified which showed a corresponding expression profile on both expression levels. Functional analysis suggests that these genes and corresponding proteins may be useful as biomarkers of early hepatocarcinogenesis.
The purpose of this study is to describe the technique of total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (type III procedure) with lymphadenectomy as performed at the Advanced Gynecological Endoscopy Center of the Malzoni Medical Center, Avellino, Italy. Seventy-seven patients underwent total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (type II, III) with lymphadenectomy between January 2000 and March 2008. FIGO stage included five patients Ia1 with LVSI (lymph-vascular involvement), 24 patients Ia2, and 48 patients Ib1. 60 patients underwent a class III procedure and 17 patients a class II procedure according to the Piver classification. Histological types included squamous cell carcinoma in 65 patients, adenocarcinomas in 10 patients, and adenosquamous carcinoma in two. Para-aortic lymphadenectomy was performed up to the level of the inferior mesenteric artery in eight cases with positive pelvic lymph nodes at frozen section evaluation. Total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy can be considered a safe and effective therapeutic procedure for the management of early stage cervical cancer with a low morbidity; moreover, the laparoscopic route may offer an alternative option for patients undergoing radical hysterectomy, although multicenter studies and long-term follow-up are required to evaluate the oncologic outcomes of this procedure.
Few studies have examined the impact of underlying diagnosis on the functional and oncologic outcomes following endoprosthetic proximal femur replacement (PFR). We performed a retrospective review of 61 consecutive cemented bipolar PFR in 59 patients for treatment neoplastic lesions with a minimum follow-up of 24 months. Twenty-two patients had primary bone tumors and 39 had metastatic disease. Average follow-up for the 30 surviving patients was 55.4 months and the mean postoperative survival for the 29 patients who died was 12.2 months. Patients with primary tumors demonstrated significantly better functional outcomes than those with metastatic disease, with mean Musculoskeletal Tumor Society functional scores of 80.2 and 66.8%, respectively (p=0.0002). Age correlated inversely with functional scores (r=-0.48; p=0.0002), while femoral resection length did not. Preoperative pathologic fracture did not appear to adversely impact final functional outcomes. The Kaplan-Meier 5-year implant survival estimate was 92.5%, with aseptic loosening as the endpoint. Both functional results and survival are increased for primary tumors versus metastatic disease following PFR. However, PFR results in excellent local disease control, reliable pain relief and good functional results in both groups, with prosthesis survival exceeding that of the patient in many cases.
Localized resection of early stage colon cancer is increasingly technically feasible by truly minimally invasive means. Such techniques as endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) and Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery (N.O.T.E.S.) now raise the prospect of focused intraluminal and transmural resection of small primary tumors without abdominal wall transgression. The potential clinical benefit that patients may accrue from targeted dissection as definitive treatment in place of radical operation is not yet definitively proven but may be considerable at least in the short-term. However, oncological propriety and outcomes must be maintained. In particular methods by which regional nodal staging can be assured if standard operation is avoided need still to be established. Sentinel node mapping is one such putative means of doing so that deserves serious consideration from this perspective as it performs a similar function for breast cancer and melanoma and because there is already considerable evidence to suggest the technique in colonic neoplasia may be at its most accurate in germinal disease. In addition, it may already be employed by laparoscopy while solely transluminal means of its deployment are advancing. While the confluence of operative technologies and techniques now coming on-stream has the potential to precipitate a dramatic shift in the paradigm for the management of early stage colonic neoplasia, considerable confirmatory study is required to ensure that oncology propriety and treatment efficacy is maintained so that patient benefit may be maximized.
Medical science is rapidly evolving and an incredible number of publications are being published. Are they all worth reading? Authors are deemed responsible for what they put down in writing; whether they are first or corresponding author, it really makes no difference. Editors of peer-reviewed international journals have agreed to share their views with the readership, in order to optimise the quality of contributions as well as to assist junior colleagues in their editorial efforts. Starting from an historical perspective, ethical issues in publishing are discussed and technical suggestions on how to get the final draft accepted for publication are outlined. Contributing towards medical science is a great pleasure to be experienced and shared.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to compare short term outcomes and oncological value of laparoscopy assisted (LADG) and open distal gastrectomy (ODG) in the treatment of early gastric cancer. METHODS: Meta-analysis of 12 studies, including three randomized controlled trials, published between 2000 and 2007, comparing laparoscopy assisted and open distal gastrectomy in 951 patients with early gastric cancer, was done. Outcomes of interest were operative data, lymph node clearance, postoperative recovery complications. RESULTS: Overall morbidity rate was significantly less with LADG (10.5% versus 20.1%, P=0.003, OR 0.52, CI 0.34-0.8). A mean of 4.61 less number of lymph nodes dissected than ODG (CI -5.96, -3.26 P<0.001) when all studies are included. There was no difference between the two groups in number of lymph nodes dissected when less than D2 lymphadenectomy was done (2.44 nodes less in LADG group, CI -5.52, 0.63; P=0.12). LADG patients had less operative blood loss (mean of 151ml, P<0.001), less time to walking, oral intake and flatus. LADG patients had less length of hospital stay (5.7days, P<0.001), postoperative fever and pain. ODG group showed significantly less operative time. There was no significant difference between the two groups in the incidence of anastomotic complications and wound infection. CONCLUSION: LADG is a safe technical alternative to ODG for early gastric cancer with a lower overall complication rate and enhanced postoperative recovery. Endorsing LADG as a better alternative to ODG requires data on long term survival, quality of life and cost effectiveness.
PURPOSE: To investigate the impact of total retrieved lymph nodes (tLNs) on staging and survival in patients with pT2b gastric cancer according to the nodal status. METHODS: Clinicopathological characteristics and prognostic outcomes of 392 patients with pT2b gastric cancer between 1980 and 2005 were retrospectively investigated based on the nodal status. RESULTS: The number of metastatic lymph nodes (mLNs) was highly correlated with the number of tLNs (P<0.001). The overall 5-year and 10-year survival rates were 39.0% (153/392) and 17.9% (70/392), respectively. The survival rates in patients with pN0 cancers did not differ significantly from that in patients with pN1 cancer when the tLNs were 25 or less. However, the survival rate in patients with N0 cancers was significantly greater than that in patients with pN1 cancers when the tLNs were more than 25 (64.3% vs. 36.9%, chi(2)=4.339, P=0.037). Moreover, both 5- and 10-year survival rates differed significantly among patients with pN1, pN2 and pN3 gastric cancer regardless of tLNs. Multivariate analysis revealed that age, tumor focus number, tumor location, and mLN, but not tLNs, were independent prognostic predictors in patients with pT2b gastric cancer. CONCLUSIONS: To improve the accuracy of staging, no less than 15 tLNs should be pathologically examined in patients with pN1-3, and 25 tLNs for the patients with N0. More tLNs may not be associated with a better prognosis in pT2b disease because the extent of lymph node dissection is pre-defined for the operation.
AIMS: To evaluate the prognostic value of immunohistochemical expression of Bcl-2 in colon cancers. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two hundred and twenty-six resected and paraffin-embedded colon carcinomas were analysed by immunostaining using monoclonal antibodies for Bcl-2. We evaluated whether the Bcl-2 staining patterns, semi-quantitatively assessed, could be correlated with the pTNM stage, size and tumour circumference, differentiation, appearance, vascular invasion, perineural invasion, colloid component, margins, involvement of adjacent structures, stromal appearance, flow cytometry and the S-phase. RESULTS: Eighty patients (36%) were considered Bcl-2 positive. The extent of Bcl-2 expression by tumour cells decreased significantly with respect to increasing tumour size (P=0.042), the extension of parietal invasion pT (P=0.007), the invasive nature of the tumour (P=0.024), and extent of the circumference (P=0.024). In a multivariate analysis, Bcl-2 expression does not appear as an independent prognosis factor in the overall population as in the 166 patients with optimal resection. Of the 59 stage II patients, using univariate analysis, Bcl-2 appears to be predictive of relapse-free survival (P=0.025) but not of overall survival (P=0.09). CONCLUSION: The loss of Bcl-2 expression appears to be correlated with increase in number of relapses in the stage II colon cancers and could be a potential useful additional histo-prognostic marker in therapy decision making. Bcl-2 immunodetection seems to be associated with slower local tumour growth.
INTRODUCTION: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is currently the fifth most common neoplasm worldwide. The only therapies which are capable of providing cure are hepatic resection and liver transplantation. Results from either resection or transplantation show 5-year survival rates of up to 70% in selected patients. Patient assessment is key to selecting candidates for surgery be it resection or transplantation. METHODS: A search was performed of the English Medline database for the period 1997-2006 using the MeSH headings: hepatocellular carcinoma, liver resection, and liver transplantation, with the main analysis concentrated on survival data for all patients undergoing resection or transplantation. RESULTS: There is a large variation in the mortality and recurrence rate following resection/transplantation due to differences in definition in different series. The median perioperative (30 day/in-hospital) mortality rate following resection was a median of 4.7%. The median 1, 3 and 5 year overall survival rates were 80.1%, 55% and 37.1%, respectively. The disease-free survivals at identical time intervals were 64%, 38% and 27%. The median 30 day mortality following liver transplant was 4.7% and the median 3-month mortality was 13.3%. The median overall 1, 3, and 5-year survival rates were 80.9%, 70.2% and 62%, respectively, whilst the disease-free survivals at identical time intervals were 79%, 62.5% and 54.5%. Several risk factors for overall and/or disease-free survival following resection and transplantation were found in those papers where a multivariate analysis was included. DISCUSSION: A possible algorithm would be to perform resection for patients with preserved liver function and offer transplantation to those of Child-Pugh status B or C who fit within Milan criteria. If recurrence occurred after resection or underlying liver disease progresses, salvage transplants may be performed. CONCLUSION: The current evidence base for resection and transplantation in the treatment of HCC is inadequate to provide a definite answer as to which is optimal therapy and a randomised controlled trial to compare the outcomes of resection and transplantation is now required.
Gene expression assays that are used in daily clinical practice for treating early breast cancer patients have been introduced in the clinic only recently. This review discusses the development of these arrays, summarizes the validation of those that are commercially available and indicates how the information provided by these assays can help in the care of patients. The review also provides an extensive overview of commercially available assays focusing on MammaPrint, the first and only assay for breast cancer management that has been cleared by the FDA.
A meta-analysis on the seroprevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and antibodies against hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) in 27881 hepatocellular carcinomas from 90 studies confirmed wide international variations. A predominance of HBsAg was found in hepatocellular carcinomas from most Asian, African and Latin American countries, but anti-HCV predominated in Europe, North America, Japan, Pakistan, Mongolia, and Egypt. Anti-HCV was found more often than HBsAg in Europe and the United States. Twenty-five years after having been licensed, HBV vaccination programmes are now carried out in 158 countries, but they have yet to reach many high-risk populations in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. In the absence of a vaccine, the prevention of HCV infection requires an integrated strategy (i.e., screening of blood donations, safe injection practices, and avoidance of unnecessary injections).
Cellular senescence is a process leading to terminal growth arrest with characteristic morphological features. This process is mediated by telomere-dependent, oncogene-induced and ROS-induced pathways, but persistent DNA damage is the most common cause. Senescence arrest is mediated by p16(INK4a)- and p21(Cip1)-dependent pathways both leading to retinoblastoma protein (pRb) activation. p53 plays a relay role between DNA damage sensing and p21(Cip1) activation. pRb arrests the cell cycle by recruiting proliferation genes to facultative heterochromatin for permanent silencing. Replicative senescence that occurs in hepatocytes in culture and in liver cirrhosis is associated with lack of telomerase activity and results in telomere shortening. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells display inactivating mutations of p53 and epigenetic silencing of p16(INK4a). Moreover, they re-express telomerase reverse transcriptase required for telomere maintenance. Thus, senescence bypass and cellular immortality is likely to contribute significantly to HCC development. Oncogene-induced senescence in premalignant lesions and reversible immortality of cancer cells including HCC offer new potentials for tumor prevention and treatment.
The liver is the main storage site for iron in the body. Excess accumulation of iron in the liver has been well-documented in two human diseases, hereditary hemochromatosis and dietary iron overload in the African. Hepatic iron overload in these conditions often results in fibrosis and cirrhosis and may be complicated by the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Malignant transformation usually occurs in the presence of cirrhosis, suggesting that free iron-induced chronic necroinflammatory hepatic disease plays a role in the hepatocarcinogenesis. However, the supervention of hepatocellular carcinoma in the absence of cirrhosis raises the possibility that ionic iron may also be directly hepatocarcinogenic. Support for this possibility is provided by a recently described animal model of dietary iron overload in which iron-free preneoplastic nodules and hepatocellular carcinoma developed in the absence of fibrosis or cirrhosis. The mechanisms by which iron induces malignant transformation have yet to be fully characterized but the most important appears to be the generation of oxidative stress. Free iron generates reactive oxygen intermediates that disrupt the redox balance of the cells and cause chronic oxidative stress. Oxidative stress leads to lipid peroxidation of unsaturated fatty acids in membranes of cells and organelles. Cytotoxic by-products of lipid peroxidation, such as malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxy-2'-nonenal, are produced and these impair cellular function and protein synthesis and damage DNA. Deoxyguanosine residues in DNA are also hydroxylated by reactive oxygen intermediates to form 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine, a major promutagenic adduct that causes G:C to T:A transversions and DNA unwinding and strand breaks. Free iron also induces immunologic abnormalities that may decrease immune surveillance for malignant transformation.
The incidence of liver cancer is high in all low-resource regions of the world, with the exception of Northern Africa and Western Asia. The estimated worldwide number of new cases of liver cancer in 2002 is 600,000, of which 82% are from developing countries. Given the poor survival from this disease, the estimated number of deaths is similar to that of new cases. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the main form of liver cancer. A part from chronic infections with Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C viruses, which are the main causes of HCC, contamination of foodstuff with aflatoxins, a group of mycotoxins produced by the fungi Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus, is an important contributor to HCC burden in many low-income country. Alcoholic cirrhosis is an important risk factor for HCC in populations with low prevalence of HBV and HCV infection, and the association between tobacco smoking and HCC is now established. Diabetes is also related to an excess risk of HCC and the increased prevalence of overweight and obesity likely contributes to it. The second most important type of liver cancer is cholangiocarcinoma, whose main known cause is infestation with the liver flukes, Opistorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis, which is frequent in some areas in South-East Asia. Angiosarcoma is a rare form of liver cancer whose occurence is linked to occupational exposure to vinyl chloride.
Primary liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer worldwide and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for over 85% of all primary liver cancers. The clinical management of advanced and metastatic HCC is challenging on many counts. Besides largely occurs within a background of underlying chronic liver disease and cirrhosis, HCC is a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous polyclonal disease and resistant to most conventional chemotherapy. Early manifestation of HCC is characteristically slow growing with few symptoms, and HCC is therefore often diagnosed at an advanced stage when potentially curative surgical or local ablative therapy is not feasible. In this review, I have summarized my presentation at the recent HCC workshop at IARC, Lyon, on our knowledge generated from comprehensive molecular studies of primary liver cancer tissues and attempt to translate these results to gain molecular insights, especially on identification of biomarkers that could confer pathological and functional changes associated with the pathogenesis and progression of HCC, hoping to provide important molecular basis for the development of novel diagnosis and treatments to alter clinical outcomes of this disease.
In recent years a number of new therapeutics has been developed that were not general toxins and inhibitors of cell division like classical chemotherapeutics, but were designed to target a specific pathway. A prerequisite for this development was the comprehensive characterization of molecular alterations occurring in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, while much knowledge of the molecular pathogenesis of human HCC has been gained, the model systems used to test the functional relevance of these alterations and applied for preclinical evaluation of drug candidates are still poorly characterized. In this paper, we reviewed the literature about several commonly used HCC cell lines and xenotransplantation models and present our own data on the molecular characterization of these. Results obtained demonstrate that it is important to have a sound knowledge of the specific molecular constitution of the experimental model and to carefully evaluate the functional status of the pathway of interest. For this reason, we make the gene expression profiles publicly available to help researchers making an informed decision about which model to use.
The development of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) has enabled high dose radiation to be directed to tumour with a frank sparing of the non-tumour surrounding liver parenchyma without restriction due to tumour topography and size, presence of peritumourous satellite nodules or associated segmental portal vein thrombosis. 3DCRT can be safely delivered alone or concomitantly with transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), giving very encouraging results. Efficacy is strongly related to a smaller tumor size and higher dose of radiation while toxicity closely correlates to the pre-radiotherapy liver functions and the dose delivered to the uninvolved liver. These data has led to integrate 3DCRT in the multimodal treatment of HCC as a possible curative-intent option as well as surgical resection or percutaneous procedures although phase-III controlled studies are warranted to clarify this point. This may represent a promising approach in patients who are inoperable or for whom other ablation therapies are not feasible. The next steps will be the optimization of delivery modes of this type of photon therapy, taking account that other radiation modalities such as proton beam therapy for instance might be shown as of great interest within the next few years.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection causes acute and chronic liver diseases and increases the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the pathogenesis of HBV infection and carcinogenesis of HBV-associated HCC are still elusive. In this review, systematic -omics studies made in the scales of genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics were discussed. The susceptibility to HBV infection and the course of disease progress are greatly different among individuals. Using population- or/and family-based approaches, relevant genes have been mapped or identified to be associated with host immune responses to HBV antigens and susceptibility to HCC. Comprehensive transcriptomic analyses have shown that the HBV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis may involve the whole course from signal transduction, transcription, translation to protein degradation, which differs in some measure from HCV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis, and that exogenous transcription factor HBX and endogenous NF-kappaB are likely two key points of the course. By the means of proteomics, dozens of important dysregulated proteins (including isoforms or fragments) were identified from carcinogenesis mechanism analysis and biomarker validation. Of them, the alteration of heat shock proteins and impairment of methylation cycle were found to be associated with clinical HBV-associated HCC. As a whole, the systematic -omics analysis of HBV-associated liver diseases has offered multi-scale pathological information in the process from HBV infection to HCC onset.
A number of risk factors appear to play a role in Hepatocellularcinoma (HCC), HBV infection being one of the most important. Chronic inflammation and cytokines are key determinants in the development of fibrosis and liver cell proliferation. HBV DNA integration and/or expression of HBV proteins may have a direct effect on cellular functions. Occult hepatitis B virus infection is characterized by persistence of HBV DNA in hepatitis B surface antigen-negative individuals. There are evidences that occult HBV is a risk factor for the development of HCC and that the potential mechanisms whereby overt HBV might induce tumour formation are mostly maintained.
Under most circumstances, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is noncytopathic. However, hepatocellular regeneration that accompanies each bout of hepatitis appears to be associated with increased integration of HBV DNA fragments expressing the virus encoded hepatitis B x antigen (HBxAg). Intrahepatic HBxAg staining correlates with the intensity and progression of chronic liver disease (CLD), and additional work has shown that HBxAg blocks immune mediated killing by Fas and by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha). This is not only associated with the blockage of caspase activities by HBxAg, but also by the constitutive stimulation of hepatoprotective pathways, such as nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and beta-catenin (beta-catenin). HBxAg also appears to promote fibrogenesis, by stimulating the production of fibronectin. HBxAg also stimulates the production and activity of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) by several mechanisms, thereby promoting the profibrogenic and tumorigenic properties of this important cytokine. In addition, HBxAg appears to remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) by altering the expression of several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which may promote tumor metastasis. Hence, HBxAg appears to promote chronic infection by preventing immune mediated apoptosis of infected hepatocytes, by promoting the establishment and persistence of fibrosis and cirrhosis preceding the development of HCC, and by promoting the remodeling of EMC during tumor progression.
The extraordinary developments made in the past decade in proteomic technologies, in particular in mass spectrometry, have enabled investigators to consider designing studies to search for diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers by scanning complex proteome samples. We developed a method based on extensive fractionation of intact proteins, to comprehensively and quantitatively profile the liver and plasma proteomes in health and disease. We have applied this method to samples collected from patients with early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and from patients with liver cirrhosis as well as to samples collected from three mouse models of HCC. This method allowed for the identification of proteins that differ in expression levels in liver tissue or in plasma with disease progression from liver fibrosis, cirrhosis or steatohepatitis to HCC. The comparative analysis of the liver and plasma proteomes generated from human and mouse specimens, constitutes a novel and powerful strategy for HCC biomarker discovery.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide and has an extremely poor prognosis. The majority of cases occur in south-east Asia and sub-Saharan Africa where the major risk factors are chronic infection with hepatitis B and C viruses (HBV and HCV) as well as dietary exposure to aflatoxins. Aflatoxin B1, the most commonly occurring and potent of the aflatoxins is associated with a specific AGG to AGT transversion mutation at codon 249 of the p53 gene in human HCC, providing mechanistic support to a causal link between exposure and disease. Prospective epidemiological studies have shown a more than multiplicative interaction between HBV and aflatoxins in terms of HCC risk. However, the biology underlying this statistical interaction is not fully understood. There are a number of potential mechanisms including, among others: the fixation of AFB1-induced mutations in the presence of liver regeneration and hyperplasia induced by chronic HBV infection; the predisposition of HBV-infected hepatocytes to aflatoxin-induced DNA damage; an increase in susceptibility to chronic HBV infection in aflatoxin-exposed individuals; and oxidative stress exacerbated by co-exposure to aflatoxins and chronic hepatitis infection. Priorities for prevention are global HBV vaccination, primary and secondary prevention strategies against aflatoxin and the avoidance of transmission of HCV through good hygiene practices.
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) in high-incidence areas (sub-Saharan Africa, South-Eastern Asia) often contains a somatic mutation at codon 249 in TP53 (R249S). This mutation is rare in low-incidence areas of Europe and the United States. There is evidence that R249S occurs as the result of mutagenesis by aflatoxin in a context of HBV chronic infection. Here, we summarize the mechanisms of R249S formation and the possible role of p.R249S protein in HCC pathogenesis. Next, we discuss the significance of R249S as a biomarker to study the natural history of HCC and as a target for therapeutic approaches aimed at restoring wild-type p53 activity.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a small hepatotropic and highly species-specific enveloped DNA virus. The carcinogenicity of this virus has become focused on the X gene and its coded X protein. The X protein itself is unable to bind to DNA directly, but works as a potent transcriptional activator through multiple cis-acting elements and mediates several signal transduction cascades. Two regions of the X protein, aa.61-69 and aa.105-140, are found essential for the viral replication and expression as well. These functions interacting with transcription factors and signaling cascades are acting cooperatively to cause cell proliferation. Furthermore, the association of X protein with mitochondria causes loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential and subsequently causes cell death, the function of which is attributed to the aa.68-104 region of X protein. As a result, the X protein has two independent proliferative and cell death-promoting activities. Liver cancer has been shown to result from a series of mutations in specific oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. In a recent study, X protein stimulates ROS generation in the mitochondria due to collapse of the membrane potential and increases the mutation frequency, that evokes malignant transformation. Inflammation as a result of HBV infection is concerned to cause DNA damage. In the past 10years, the possibility that several viral proteins directly engaged in the DNA damage has increased to some extent. From an evolutionary viewpoint, it is noteworthy that several arrangement proteins have been found in viruses. Thus, there is some clue that a small amount of X protein acts as an arrangement protein for HBV replication dependent upon cellular DNA damage due to generated ROS as an amplified signal.
Eight liver centres in France have joined their effort to collect, preserve and distribute tissue samples from hepatocellular carcinomas, according to the recommendations for Biological Resources Centres (BRC) released by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), which were recently implemented in France. This led to the creation of a Liver cancer biobanks network which is recognized by the Ministry of research and the Ministry of health and sponsored by the main research agencies, namely Inserm and INCa. Samples are collected and stored locally, whereas related annotations are remotely collected within a central database. The management of the network includes a Scientific Committee, an Executive Board and an Epidemiology and Management Coordinating Centre. Samples are made available to research groups following acceptance of research projects submitted to the scientific committee. Samples from the Liver cancer biobanks network were used in recent works aiming at identifying key genomic alterations occurring in the development of hepatocellular carcinomas, as well as new set of biomarkers, including transcriptomic and proteomic signatures, and candidate targets for anti-cancer drugs.
This article reviews mechanisms involved in development of hepatocellular carcinoma and how host and environmental factors interact at a molecular level to cause cancer. These processes are intimately linked with strategies for early detection since molecular intermediates on the carcinogenesis pathway can now be detected with increasing levels of sensitivity. Similarly host factors influencing response to environmental agents, together with substances produced by early cancers, can be assayed in fine detail with new and emerging technologies. These advances in the field of biomarkers may lead to more rapid diagnosis and ultimately to improved survival as novel therapeutic strategies are adopted.
Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) has always been considered a therapeutic challenge, given the cytoxic drug resistant nature of the cancer and associated disorder in liver function, reducing the safety of many conventional chemotherapy agents. The Multikinase inhibitor sorafenib has been found to prolong survival in patients with advanced HCC, by around 3months compared to placebo, but novel treatments need to be explored. Current experimental therapeutic approaches encompass a broad range of science, ranging from intrahepatic irradiation to virus directed immunotherapy. This chapter presents a horizon scan of novel treatments which are currently at early stages of trial development.
Hepatitis B viruses (HBV) are responsible for over 50% of the worldwide attributable risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and this figure increases even further in regions of high endemicity. Systematic sequencing of HBV genomes has identified that this common virus existed as eight distinct genotypes (denoted A-H), each regrouping variants with less than 8% divergence in their DNA sequence. These genotypes differ by their geographic distribution in populations around the globe. There is evidence that HBV genotypes also differ by their pathogenic properties, including their risk of persistence as chronic infection and their capacity to induce precursor disease or cancer. On the other hand, HBV genes may undergo mutations that become selected during the course of chronic infection and progressive liver disease. The most significant of these mutations in the context of HCC are those occurring in the pre-core (Pre-C) and basal core promoter (BCP) regions. These mutations may upregulate HBV expression and increase its virulence. These mutations may occur in all HBV genotypes but are more common in genotypes associated with more severe disease and cancer, in particular genotype C. Understanding the molecular basis of pathological variations between HBV variants is critical for prediction of disease severity. It will also be important to determine whether differences among genotypes may have an impact on the long-term protective efficacy of universal HBV vaccination.
There are approximately 360 millions chronic carriers of Hepatitis B virus worldwide. Patterns of HB carriage are variable from one region to the other. Regions with rates of carriage over 8% are commonly considered as "high endemicity" regions. HB carriers have a very significant lifetime risk of developing chronic liver diseases such as cirrhosis and/or liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC). An efficient HB vaccine is available since the early eighties and has been used since for universal infant vaccination in regions of high endemicity. Observations from Taiwan, where universal infant vaccination was introduced from 1984, show a remarkable, long-lasting protection against carriage and reduction of HCC rates in adolescent and young adults born after the initiation of the programme. Two population-based trials have been set up in the mid-eighties to evaluate lifelong protective effects of infant HB vaccine against liver cancer, in The Gambia (West Africa) and in the area of Qidong, China. In other high-endemicity regions of Asia and Africa, universal infants vaccination has consistently showed a long-lasting high protection against chronic carriage and this is expected to lead to a dramatic decrease of chronic liver disease and liver cancer within the next decades. Here we briefly review the lessons of vaccination programmes and trials in high-endemicity regions, based on data gathered during 15-20years of implementation.
